The University of Strathclyde 
In product design environments where safety is critical, industries can often be
reluctant to adopt emerging technologies. This is the case for many endovascular
device manufacturers, where advanced non-linear Finite Element Analysis methods
are still to be incorporated into their product design functions. To encourage
adoption this thesis explores the merits and limitations of newly developed
constitutive models as implemented into leading numerical analysis software suites.
Specific attention is given to the Holzapfel soft tissue and Auricchio Nitinol
constitutive models.
Limitations and merits are explored through the development of an integrated
modelling framework. This framework was constructed around a case study for
which Vascutek's Anaconda
stent graft system was chosen. In its final iteration
the framework took the form of a series of python scripts which could be imported
into Abaqus 6.11 to generate a variety of FE studies.
For the development of the python scripts, a generalised artery material model was
required for which a vascular characterisation programme was initiated. This
programme mechanically characterised three human abdominal aortas using
uniaxial and biaxial characterisation methods. By deploying Anaconda proximal ring
devices within cadaver specimens and recording deformations, the programme
produced detailed out-of-plane deformation data for vascular tissue. Where
possible, results obtained were combined with those found in the academic
literature. From this, comprehensive data sets were created from which a
generalised mechanical description for the abdominal aorta was proposed. In this
study, the accuracy of such a generalised arterial description was also explored for
the first time.
The work herein present a range of advanced Finite Element modelling techniques.
These techniques range from a bespoke three layered abdominal aorta arterial
model to novel wire bundle modelling methods. A comprehensive study into
Nitinol's load path dependency effects is also presented.  The study correlated the
effect as captured within experimental results against those predicted by Finite
Element Analysis. Findings of this study highlight limitations within the Auricchio
constitutive model as implemented into Abaqus 6.11 and emphasise the need to
model the entire loading regime when conducting Finite Element studies.
The extensive validation procedures used to determine the accuracy of the
integrated modelling framework are presented. It is shown for the case study
chosen, that the framework is capable of capturing a range of complex device-
artery interactions. It is also shown that the model is capable of predicting
deformations within 35% of that measured during device deployment and cadaver
specimen pressure-inflation experiments.
It is a conclusion of this thesis, that from an understanding of the limitations
involved, current FE technologies could be feasibly integrated into product design
methodologies through the development of robust, computationally efficient
design tools.
