Parametric sweep search for parallel robot workspace determination
The research presented in this thesis aims to augment the conventional kinematic-based
parallel robot workspace determination into an interactive 3D visual system by
highlighting the design issue clearly and providing important design information to the
user in real-time. The conventional iteration involves heavy computation, high resolution
data processing and multiple technical skills set which usually reduce the design option
into amending an existing design most related to the requirement. The thesis presents a 3D
simulation system that is open and modular and allows for algorithm and technical
functional extensions.
Following an extensive literature survey on key aspects relating to parallel design
development, parallel robot singularity, and search for workspace, five main phases of
experimental works were undertaken to develop a strategic search and analysis of parallel
robots workspace.
Phase 1 involves the development of a 3-dimensional simulation system based on Python
in order to search for workspace and singularity. The 3-dimensional motions are based on
Kinematic, and should integrate easily with various algorithms. The simulation system
produces a draft quality result, which is scalable to higher resolutions. Phase 2 involves the
development of geometric singularity and Grassmann singularity real-time test. The code
should work effortlessly when user redefines the architecture or geometry of the robot.
Phase 3 involves the development of Boolean Parametric sweep search strategy that
provides an analysis and validation method for the system. The system has to consider
various factors such as limit, edge, resolution, and travel direction. This phase involves the
integration of 3D and 4D interpolation and extrapolation strategies including Trilinear, L-
system fractal, Simplex, adjacency tree and Marching Cube. Phase 4 involves the
development of a dynamic grid that is easily integrated into 2D and 3D databases. The
haptic engine finds position and orientation information based on this dynamic grid. The
grid is tested for a number of concepts such as Simplex, Binary tree and L-system fractal.
It was found that the parametric sweep based on Boolean control is applicable in real-time
dynamic grid system, where the direction, region and constraint are configurable by either
the user or automatically by the system. Phase 5 involves the development of a controller
for the Python simulation. This is a multiple Degree-of-Freedom device with two-way
motor control for all axes, which is fitted with sensors to provide pre-processed value for
distance and orientation on all axes. The controller is a haptic device that provides the user
with force-feedback sensation while user operates and manipulates the device. The haptic
device provides (i) control for the Python simulation, (ii) processed data to a Matlab and
Solid Works system, and (iii) singularity-free control of an associated physical robot. The
proposed system is finally verified against a number of applications.
