Computer simulation studies of complex magnetic materials
by Weiwei Wang
With the development of both computing power and software engineering, computer
simulation of the micromagnetic model or atomistic spin model, has become an impor-
tant tool for studying a wide range of different complex phenomena in magnetic ma-
terials. Meanwhile, the rapid improvement of advanced measurement techniques has
allowed the probing of ultrafast magnetization dynamics, as well as the magnetic phe-
nomena involving charge current, heat and light. The simulation of magnetism is now
moving towards a multiphysics method. Therefore, fast, user-friendly, and extensible
codes with accurate algorithms are helpful in understanding the physics and designing
novel magnetic devices on the nanoscale.
In the preparation of this thesis we have developed Fidimag, which is a Python/C sim-
ulation tool supporting both micromagnetic and atomistic spin models. The software
has also been extended to support the Landau-Lifshitz-Baryakhtar (LLBar) equation.
Using Fidimag, we have performed simulations to study the domain-wall motion and
spin-wave decaywith the LLBar equation. We also explain the exchange damping in the
LLBar equation as the phenomenological nonlocal damping by linking it to spin pump-
ing, therefore, LLBar equation can be considered as a phenomenological equation of the
nonlocal damping.
We studied magnon-induced domain-wall motion in the presence of Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interaction (DMI) numerically and theoretically. We find that the presence of
DMI and easy-plane anisotropy can drive the domain wall very effectively and that the
domain-wall velocity depends on the sign of DMI constant. While the negative velocity
is considered as a result of angular momentum conservation, we attribute this fast
domain-wall motion to linear momentum transfer between magnons and the domain
wall. By numerically solving the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation with a classical
spin model on a two-dimensional system, we show that both magnetic skyrmions and
skyrmion lattices can be moved with microwave magnetic fields. The mechanism is
enabled by breaking the axial symmetry of the skyrmion with a static in-plane external
field.
