Microsoft Word - WRAP_THESIS_coversheet
The thesis represents an attempt to bring together theoretical
and empirical work on (grotesque/excremental) humour. The first two
sections are consequently concerned with the history and theoris-
ation of the grotesque/excremental and with the prevalent ways of
analysing the comedic. It was decided that a 'history' of Monty
Python would constitute too long a digression, and so only a brief
account of Terry Gilliam's links with the grotesque is included.
Two further section then deal with some of the research on the
comedic which has been done and with audience research methodol-
ogies. It is worth noting a shift which took place in the course of
work on this thesis, from a concern with highly individuated
responses (reflecting the centrality of psychoanalytic explications
of the comedic) to an eventual decision to concentrate on a 'reader-
response' approach. The rationale for this shift is discussed in
Section 5, and briefly in Section 6.
The empirical heart of the research is, then, an analysis of a
transcript of six hours of taped interviews/discussions about
responses to Monty Python's Meaning of Life. These are supplemented
by the results of Humour Appreciation Tests and Mood Adjective Check
Lists administered under standard conditions to the respondents
watching the film.
While there can be no question of 'proof', particularly in a
field in which psychoanalytic mechanisms are arguably crucial,
results of the empirical study indicate that the humour of Meaning
of Life functions to reduce anxiety, and that the mechanism by which
this occurs conforms to a Freudian repression model. Over and above
this, however, - the work of David Morley and Janice Radway is worth
evoking here - the detailed account of audience response also furn-
ishes data for further enquiry about how and why 'real' respondents
do or do not find grotesque and excremental humour 'funny'.
Introduction.
"Humour (is) the most exquisitely dull and stupefyingly unin-
teresting topic known to man, the Law of Real Property not
excepted ..." - John Cleesel
The idea for this research was informed by at least two areas of
interest: first the work which I had done on the comedic for an MA
dissertation, 2 and, second, an interest in the popularity of Monty
Python. These two were then linked by a concern for historical
specificity and some degree of analytical rigour, products of a
scientific training and of the kind of original-source research
encouraged at the Polytechnic of London.
Whilst the Monty Python films (particularly Meaning of Life,
1983) and the ways in which they function remain of focal interest,
I have found myself drawn into a study of the history of manners, of
attitudes to the 'unclean', and of the origins of and developments
in notions of the grotesque; this historical/theoretical material
will constitute the first section of this thesis.
The second section will be concerned with theories of comedy/
humour/pleasure, and particularly with excremental and other 'taboo'
areas. At this point a first central problematic will be intro-
duced, that of the l immanence 13 or otherwise of comedicity. It will
emerge that humour/funniness can only be discovered through a
reading subject's negotiation of potentially comedic elements in a
text; yet this will only beg the (even bigger) question of how such
negotiation is effected. The axiomatic term here will be the
unconscious, in relation both to the individual topography of
symbolisation, repression, sublimation etc. and to the maintenance
of social-subject positioning through various ideological oper-
ations. While this will enable us to theorise the effectivity of
humour and other pleasures with a fair degree of coherence, the
notion of the unconscious can already alert us to the difficulties
which will accompany our empirical project. We shall be examining
the interface of the articulable and the inarticulable, and the
problem is going to be: can we gain access to the inarticulable?
Short of psychoanalysing the respondents in the empirical project,
what can we learn about what they cannot articulate?
The parenthetical and severely curtailed third section will look
very briefly at the influence of Terry Gilliam's animation style on
the development of a grotesque/excremental strand in the comedic ity
of Monty Python.
In the fourth and fifth sections we shall be moving towards a
methodology for some empirical research on a Meaning of Life
audience. First we shall review some of the more self-consciously
'scientific' experimental/empirical work which has been done on
sexual, aggressive and absurd humour and make some comments about
the appropriateness or otherwise of the approaches used. We shall
then turn to some audience research based on interview methods, and
consider the reader-response model developed by Janice Radway4 for
studying the readers of romance novels.
Finally, in the sixth and most voluminous section, we shall
elucidate and activate our own audience research model. This will
turn out to be primarily interview-based, but with some additional
quantifying 'gadgets' drawn from the research literature. As in the
work published by David Morley, 5 the emphasis will be on a descrip-
tive account of viewers' responses, heuristically organized under a
number of categories. While this will clearly represent a ceding of
primacy to the articulable, an occasional symptomatic reading may
nevertheless be possible with regard to that which cannot be articu-
lated. In addition to this, and in the final pages of the section,
the data from the more 'scientific' gadgets will enable us to make
some pertinent, and perhaps less speculative, comments about the
inarticulable in relation to Freudian notions of repression.
Given the nature of the quarry, then - the unconscious mecha-
nisms by which particular respondents negotiate the comedic in
general and Monty Python's Meaning of Life in particular -, there
can be no question of 'proof' here. It will rather be a matter of
making a modest addition to an understanding first of how certain
kinds of comedic elements can be seen to be negotiated in particular
instances, and, second, of what kinds of psychoanalytic and ideolog-
ical functions such comedicity can fulfil.
Sources of attitudes to the grotesque and the excremental.
