PRODUCTION AND ASSESSMENT OF OVINE ANTIVENOMS 
FOR THE TREATMENT OF SNAKE ENVENOMING IN 
SAUDI ARABIA 
ABDULRAHMAN KHAZIM AL-ASMARI 
BSc. Pharmacy and MSc. Toxicology 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICAL PATHOLOGY 
THE MEDICAL COLLEGE OF 
ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S HOSPITAL, 
LONDON, UK. 
A thesis submitted to the Faculty of Medicine 
University of London 
for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
FOR MY WIFE 
F. AL-ASMARI 
MY CHILDS 
SARAH, BAYAN AND YAISR 
ABSTRACT 
Venoms from the most poisonous snakes found in Saudi Arabia were assessed for their 
physical and chemical characteristics and for their enzymatic and biological activities. 
Venom from Atractaspis microlepidota was the most lethal in mice followed by the 
elapids Naja haje arabica and Walterinnesia aegyptia. Among the vipers, Cerastes 
cerastes venom was the most lethal whereas the remainder (Echis pyramidum, Echis 
coloratus and Bitfis arietans) showed similar but lower lethality. 
Antivenoms were raised in sheep by immunising with a low dose of venom (0.5mg) 
which was then doubled every four weeks. To optimise the antibody response, groups 
of sheep were immunised with a low, medium and high dose and the monthly bleeds 
were assessed by ELISA and small-scale affinity chromatography. 
The immunoglobulin fraction was partially purified by sodium sulphate precipitation 
and digested with either papain, to form Fab fragments, or with pepsin to produce 
F(ab)2. The different antivenom fractions produced were characterised and assessed for 
their ability to neutralise the enzymatic and biological activities of the corresponding 
venoms. Fab was equally effective as F(ab)2 in most enzymatic and biological assays but 
the two fractions were less efficient than IgG. The ovine Fab provided good protection 
in mice against the lethality of these venoms and effectively neutralised their 
biological and enzymatic activities. 
The commercial antivenoms currently available in Saudi Arabia showed only partial 
neutralisation of the enzymatic and biological activities of these venoms and showed 
in vivo protection only when using large amounts. They offered no protection against 
W. aegyptia venom. The monospecific ovine Fab raised against E. pyramidum and E. 
coloratus venoms were more efficient than the polyspecific Fab raised against a 
mixture of the two venoms. 
CONTENTS 
TITLE 1 
ABSTRACT 
CONTENTS 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ix 
ABBREVIATIONS x 
PUBLICATION ASSOCIATED WITH THIS WORK xii 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 2 
1.2 VENOMOUS SNAKES 3 
1.2.1 Classification and Geographical Distribution 3 
1.2.2 Snake Venoms and Their Constituents 6 
1.2.3 Treatment of Snake Bite 9 
1.2.4 Laboratory Diagnosis 11 
1.3 SAUDI ARABIAN VENOMOUS SNAKES 12 
1.3.1 Classification and Geographical Distribution 12 
1.3.2 Clinical Manifestations 19 
1.3.3 Biological Effects 22 
1.4 ANTIVENOMS 26 
1.4.1 Antibody Structure 26 
1.4.2 Antibody Fragments 27 
1.4.3 Monoclonal and Polyclonal Antibodies 30 
1.4.4 Monospecific and Polyspecific Antivenoms 
1.5 REQUIREMENTS FOR PRODUCTION OF ANTI VENOMS 32 
1.5.1 Animal 32 
1.5.2 Immunogen 33 
1.5.3 Adjuvant 34 
1.5.4 Immunisation Protocol 35 
1.5.5 Antiserum Collection and Processing 36 
1.6 ASSESSMENT OF ANTIVENOMS 37 
1.6.1 Binding Assays 38 
1.6.2 Neutralisation of Biological Activity 40 
1.6.3 Neutralisation of Enzymatic Activity 41 
1.7 AIM OF STUDY 41 
CHAPTER II 
MATERIALS, INSTRUMENTATION AND METHODS 
2.1 MATERIALS 43 
2.1.1 Venom Collection 43 
2.1.2 Antivenoms and Immunochemicals 43 
2.1.3 General Chemicals and Materials 43 
2.2 LIST OF GENERAL INSTRUMENTATION 45 
2.3 GENERAL METHODS 46 
2.3.1 Immunoglobulin Fractionation 46 
2.3.2 Papain Digestion 46 
2.3.3 Pepsin Digestion 47 
2.3.4 Protein Concentration 47 
2.3.5 Albumin Concentration 47 
2.3.6 Fc Concentration 47 
2.3.7 Immunoelectrophoresis 48 
2.3.8 Fast Protein Liquid Chromatography 48 
2.3.9 Reversed Phase High Pressure Liquid Chromatography 48 
2.3.10 SDS-PAGE 50 
2.3.11 Sterility 50 
2.3.12 Bacterial Endotoxin Test 52 
2.4 ASSESSMENT METHODS 52 
2.4.1 Binding Assays 52 
2.4.2 Enzymatic Assays 55 
2.4.3 Biological Assays 59 
CHAPTER III 
CHARACTERISATION OF SAUDI ARABIAN VENOMS 
3.1 SUMMARY 69 
3.2 PHYSICOCHEMICAL ASSESSMENT 70 
3.2.1 Reversed-Phase Chromatography 70 
3.2.2 Fast Protein Liquid Chromatography 70 
3.2.3 Non Reducing SDS-PAGE 70 
3.3 ENZYMATIC ACTIVITIES 74 
3.3.1 Phospholipase A2 74 
3.3.2 Phosphodiesterase 74 
3.3.3 Hyaluronidase 74 
3.3.4 L-Amino Acid Oxidase 74 
3.3.5 Proteolytic Activity 76 
3.4 BIOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES 76 
3.4.1 Indirect Haemolysis 76 
3.4.2 Coagulation 76 
3.4.3 Platelet Aggregation 76 
3.4.4 Neurotoxicity and Myotoxicity 78 
3.4.5 Haemorrhagic Activity 78 
3.4.6 Necrotic Activity 78 
3.4.7 Defibrinogenating Activity 84 
3.4.8 Lethality 84 
3.5 DISCUSSION 84 
CHAPTER IV 
ASSESSMENT OF OVINE ANTIVENOMS FOR TREATING 
ENVENOMATION BY SAUDI ARABIAN VENOMOUS SNAKES 
4.1 SUMMARY 91 
4.2 PRODUCTION OF OVINE ANTIVENOMS 91 
4.2.1 Immunisation and Bleeding 91 
4.2.2 Optimisation of Immunisation Dose 92 
4.2.2.1 Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay 92 
4.2.2.2 Small Scale Affinity Chromatography 95 
4.3 PREPARATION OF IMMUNOGLOBULIN AND 98 
Fab FRACTIONS 
4.4 NEUTRALISATION OF ENZYMATIC ACTIVITIES 103 
4.5 NEUTRALISATION OF BIOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES 106 
4.5.1 Indirect Haemolytic Activity 106 
4.5.2 Coagulant Activity 106 
4.5.3 Platelet Aggregation 106 
4.5.4 Haemorrhagic Activity 106 
4.5.5 Necrotic Activity 110 
4.5.6 Defibrinogenating Activity 110 
4.5.7 Lethal Toxicity 110 
4.6 CROSS-NEUTRALISATION STUDIES 110 
4.6.1 Western Blotting 110 
4.6.2 Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay 114 
4.6.3 Small Scale Affinity Chromatography 115 
4.7 DISCUSSION 118 
CHAPTER V 
COMPARISON OF OVINE AND EQUINE ANTIVENOMS 
5.1 SUMMARY 123 
5.2 COMPARISON OF IgG, F(ab)2 AND Fab FRACTIONS 123 
5.2.1 Pepsin Digestion of Ovine IgG 123 
5.2.2 Neutralisation of Enzymatic Activities 124 
5.2.3 Neutralisation of Biological Activities 129 
5.3 COMPARISON OF OVINE MONOSPECIFIC AND 129 
POLYSPECIFIC ANTIVENOMS RAISED AGAINST 
E. PYRAMID UM AND E. COLORATUS VENOMS 
5.3.1 Production and Assessment of Antivenoms 129 
5.3.2 Neutralisation of Enzymatic and Biological Activities 132 
5.3.3 Neutralisation of Nigerian E. ocellatus Venom Activities 132 
5.4 COMPARISON OF COMMERCIAL ANTIVENOMS 136 
5.4.1 Physicochemical Characterisation 136 
5.4.2 Neutralisation of Enzymatic Activities 137 
5.4.3 Neutralisation of Biological Activities 141 
5.5 DISCUSSION 147 
CHAPTER VI 
ASSESSMENT OF OVINE ANTIVENOM AGAINST DESERT 
BLACK COBRA (WALTERINNESIA AEGYPTIA) VENOM 
6.1 SUMMARY 152 
6.2 CHARACTERISATION OF W. AEGYPTIA VENOM 153 
6.2.1 Physicochemical Assessment 153 
6.2.2 Enzymatic Activities 153 
6.2.3 Biological Activities 153 
6.3 OVINE ANTIVENOM 161 
6.3.1 CHARACTERISATION OF OVINE ANTIVENOM 161 
6.3.2 Binding Activity 163 
6.3.3 Neutralisation of Enzymatic Activities 163 
6.3.4 Neutralisation of Biological Activities 166 
6.3.5 Cross-Neutralisation Studies 166 
6.4 COMPARISON OF IgG, F(ab)2 AND Fab FRACTIONS 169 
6.4.1 Binding Activity 169 
6.4.2 Neutralisation of Enzymatic and Biological Activities 172 
6.5 COMPARISON OF EQUINE AND OVINE ANTIVENOMS 172 
6.5.1 Physicochemical Assessment 172 
6.5.2 Binding Activity 172 
6.5.3 Neutralisation of Enzymatic Activities 174 
6.5.4 Neutralisation of Biological Activities 174 
6.5.5 Cross-Neutralisation Studies 174 
6.6 DISCUSSION 174 
CHAPTER VII 179 
FINAL DISCUSSION 
REFERENCES 187 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank Professor J. Landon for his guidance and support throughout this 
study. I am also grateful to Dr L. Sjostrom for offering valuable advice, unlimited 
patience and co-operation and Dr I. Al-Abdullah for his generosity, encouragement 
and friendship. 
I would like to thank all my friends and colleagues at Therapeutic Antibodies for their 
kindness and assistance and staff at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine and 
Blaenwaun Farm. 
Finally, I am deeply grateful to my parents for their unquestioning support and 
understanding and without whom this thesis wouldn't have been written. 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ADP Adenosine diphosphate 
BCG Bromocresol green 
BDL Below detectable level 
BET Bacterial endotoxin test 
BSA Bovine serum albumin 
CM Carboxymethyl 
CNBr Cyanogen bromide 
cpm Counts per minute 
CV Coefficient of variation 
DAS Donkey anti-sheep 
DEAE Diethylaminoethyl 
DIC Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
ED50 Median effective dose of antivenom 
EDTA Ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid 
ELISA Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
EU Endotoxin unit 
FAD Flavin adenine dinucleotide 
FPLC Fast protein liquid chromatography 
HPLC High pressure liquid chromatography 
hr Hour(s) 
HRP Horseradish peroxidase 
HYL Hyaluronidase 
IEMA Immunoenzymometric assay 
IgG Immunglobulin G 
im Intramuscular 
ip Intraperitoneal 
iv Intravenous 
K Affinity constant 
kDa Kilodalton 
LAL Limulus Amebocyte Lysate 
L-AAO L-Amino acid oxidase 
LD50 Median lethal dose of venom 
M Moles per litre 
mCi Millicurie 
MDD Minimum defibrinogenating dose 
MHD Minimum haemorrhagic dose 
min Minute(s) 
MND Minimum necrotic dose 
MWt Molecular weight 
NHS Normal horse serum 
NSB Non-specific binding 
NSS Normal sheep serum 
OD Optical density 
O/N Overnight 
PAGE Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis 
PBS Phosphate buffered saline 
PDE Phosphodiesterase 
PEG Polyethylene glycol 
PLA2 Phospholipase A2 
PPP Platelet-poor plasma 
PRP Platelet-rich plasma 
RIA Radioimmunoassay 
RPC Reversed phase chromatography 
rpm Revolutions per minute 
rt Room temperature 
s Second(s) 
SD Standard deviation 
SDS Sodium dodecyl sulphate 
SEM Standard error of mean 
TRIS Tris(hydroxymethyl)amino methane 
WHO World Health Organisation 
Publication Associated with this Work 
Al-Asmari, A. K., Al-Abdullah, I. H., Crouch, R. G., Smith, D. C. and Sjostrom, L. 
(1996). Assessment of an ovine antivenom raised against venom from the desert black 
cobra (Walterinnesia aegyptia). Toxicon, in press. 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 HISTORICAL SUMMARY 
From the earliest times, people have been aware of the possible dangers of bites and 
stings by insects, snakes, fish and other species. The oldest medical writings are the 
ancient papyri from Egypt, dating from around 1600 B. C. These contain various 
prescriptions used to treat injuries or disease and, to treat snake bites; the Hearst 
Medical Papyrus recommends leek, garlic, onion juice, salt, bile, and incense, to be 
bandaged onto the place where the bite occured. The best summary of classical 
Greco-Roman and Islamic medicine is given by Francis Adams (1846) who reported 
that the general treatment of snake bites included immediate sucking of the bitten 
area, followed by cupping and, then, as introduced later by the Islamic physicians, by 
cautery. Various local applications were suggested including onions, wine and hot 
vinegar, with various internal remedies comprising "theriacs", which were mild 
stimulating materials. 
The ancient fear of mad dogs and their bites was dramatically allayed by the insight 
of Louis Pasteur (1885). Suspecting an infectious agent, he was successful in 
devising a protective antibody preparation without being able to isolate or identify 
the virus. Pasteur's discoveries lead to the establishment of Pasteur Institutes 
throughout the world for the preparation of antirabies vaccines and for 
immunological research in general. 
The pioneer investigations of Sewall (1887), at the University of Michigan, ushered 
in a new era in the treatment of snake envenomation. He showed that the 
experimental species (the pigeon) could be protected by prior immunisation with 
rattlesnake venom. These studies led to investigations by Calmette (1894a, b, 1895, 
1898) who obtained immunity in experimental animals by immunising them with 
venoms (acquired, active immunity) and showed that the serum of immunised 
animals could protect other animals against cobra venoms (passive immunity). 
Meanwhile, Sir Thomas Fraser, a well-known Edinburgh toxicologist, also 
investigated immunisation against cobra venom and obtained a specific immune 
serum (1895). In 1896, Calmette published a small volume on the venom of serpents 
that provided the background for immunisation and, as a result, several Pasteur 
Institutes throughout the world undertook to supply "antivenoms, or antivenins". At 
present, more than 70 institutions world-wide are devoted to the production of 
antivenoms. 
Systematic studies of the biological actions of snake venoms were undertaken by 
Flexner (1863-1954) and Noguchi (1876-1928) at the Rockefeller Institute in New 
York. They described in detail the effects of various snake venoms in producing 
haemolysis and other toxic effects on blood and also showed that snake venoms 
could cause bacteriolysis. Keyes (1875-1928) investigated cobra venom and showed 
that lecithin is a compliment for cobra haemolysin. In 1963, Russell characterised 
venoms from fifteen kinds of poisonous snake and sixteen kinds of venomous marine 
animal. The venoms from these sources contained many enzymes and nonenzymatic 
proteins of high molecular weight. Some of these proteins liberated bradykinin and 
histamine from cells and these substances contribute greatly to local pain and tissue 
damage at the bite site. In 1938, Slotta and Fraenkel-Conrat isolated "crotoxin" from 
the venom of Crotalus terrificus and reported that it has a molecular weight of 
30kDa. Subsequently it has been shown that most snake venoms contain at least a 
dozen proteins with varying activities. 
1.2 VENOMOUS SNAKES 
1.2.1 Classification and Geographical Distribution 
Snakes (or ophidia/serpents) are members of the class Reptilia (phylum Chordata), 
which includes other backboned animals such as crocodiles and lizards. They form 
an evolutionary link between the amphibians and the warm-blooded birds and 
mammals. The oldest known snakes date from the late Cretaceous and Eocene period 
about 120 million years ago. They were often large and similar to modern boas and 
pythons which are probably their direct descendants (Romer, 1947). Currently there 
are about 3000 species of snakes in the world separated into 10 or 12 families, of 
which about 375 species are considered venomous (Russell, 1983). These are 
members of the following families (1) Colubridae, (2) Elapidae, (3) Hydrophiidae, 
(4) Viperidae (subfamily Viperinae and subfamily Crotalinae) and (5) 
Atractaspidinae. 
The Colubridae is the largest family and comprises about 70% of all the genera. 
These snakes are distributed throughout the world in diverse habitats. Thus while 
most are terrestrial, some are aquatic, others arboreal and some are fossorial. Some 
colubrids are diurnal and others are nocturnal. All have teeth on both jaws. The 
aglyphous colubrids have solid teeth which are not grooved and they have no venom 
glands. The opisthoglyphous colubrids have enlarged grooved maxillary teeth half 
way along the upper jaw, approximately under the eyes, as well as venom sacs. They 
are poisonous in varying degrees but the venom is usually of low toxicity to man, and 
the small volume that can be obtained from individual snakes has enabled very few 
toxicological studies. 
The Elapidae is the second largest family and contains nearly half all known 
venomous snake species (169 species). They are thought to have evolved from the 
Colubridae, from which they differ in having a more efficient system for injecting 
venom. Thus the fangs are effectively tubular and are positioned at the front of the 
mouth where they may be brought into use more easily. The Elapidae are distributed 
throughout Asia (cobras and kraits) Australia (death adder and tiger snake), the 
Americas (coral snakes) and Africa (cobras and mambas). Bites by elapids are 
notable for producing minimal to moderate local but prominent neurological 
manifestations and death, if it occurs, is usually due to respiratory arrest Reid and 
Theakston (1983), 
The Hydrophiidae (sea snakes, 35 species) are sometimes classified as elapids which 
have adapted to a marine habitat. They inhabit the tropical Indian and the western 
Pacific Oceans. The snakes are proteroglyphous with fangs present at the front of the 
upper jaw and these are usually followed, after an interspace, by solid teeth 
posteriorly on the maxillary bone. There are also teeth on the mandible. Sea snakes 
are diurnal or nocturnal, depending on surface water temperatures (Gasperetti, 1988). 
Their venom is extremely toxic, much more so than the most venomous terrestrial 
snakes and this enables them to capture their agile prey, mainly fish and eels, as it 
paralyses them very rapidly. Fortunately they are not aggressive and, in the Arabian 
Gulf, sea snakes are commonly caught in fish traps or nets from which they are 
casually picked by hand and thrown back into the water. 
Members of the subfamily Crotalinae are also known as pit vipers due to differential 
temperature receptors located in a pit on both sides of the head between the nostril 
and eye. They have a worldwide distribution and consist of six genera: Agkistrodon 
found in Asia and America, Trimeresurus restricted to Asia, and the other four 
genera Bothrops, Crotalus, Sistrurus and Lachesis which are found only in the New 
World. 
The Viperinae subfamily is commonly called the true or Old World vipers and is 
closely related to the crotalids. Vipers are distributed in Europe, Africa and Asia and 
some Pacific Islands, but none inhabit the American or Australian continents. There 
are about 40 species represented by nine genera: Bitfis, Causus, Cerastes, Athens, 
Adenorhinus, Vipera, Echis, Eristicophis and Pseudocerastes. Vipers are 
solenoglyphous snakes, with a highly specialised skull structure that allows very 
efficient movement of the long, frontal fangs. The double socketed maxilla is short 
and deep and rotates around the maxillo-prefrontal bone in a parasaggital plane. On 
its end is one hollow fang, and its replacement fangs. 
Family Atractaspididae is a monogeneric family comprising small, venomous 
fossorial snakes of about 14 species. Kochva (1987) placed these snakes in a separate 
family with the vernacular designation of "burrowing asps". There is now little doubt 
that they are related to the Aparallactinae, which they resemble in many external 
features and their mode of life. Atractaspids have unique dentition, unlike any other 
snake, with only superficial resemblance to that of the snakes of the family Viperidae 
(Broadley, 1983). 
1.2.2 Snake Venoms and Their Constituents 
Snake venoms are complex mixtures consisting mainly of proteins. Thus the dry 
weight is typically about 10% of the wet weight with approximately 90% of the dry 
weight comprising proteins. The more lethal fractions of snake venoms appear to be 
peptides and, perhaps, certain nonenzymatic proteins, although the enzyme 
components certainly contribute to the overall deleterious effects of the crude venom. 
Enzymes comprise from 80-95% of the total dry weight of viperid and crotalid 
venoms and from 25-70% of elapid venoms (Mebs, 1970). There are at least 26 
venom enzymes with molecular weights ranging between 11 and 150kDa (Table 1.1). 
Although no single venom contains all of these, at least 10 enzymes are found in 
most snake venoms, while the remainder are scattered throughout the venoms of the 
six families of poisonous snakes. For example elapid venoms are rich in 
acetylcholinesterase, whereas crotalid and viperid venoms lack this enzyme but are 
rich in endopeptidase. Colubrid venoms are normally free from clot-promoting 
enzymes (Eagle, 1937). 
Table 1.1 Enzymes in snake venoms. 
Enzyme Molecular Weight (Da) 
Phospholipase A2 11,000 - 15,000 
L-Amino acid oxidase 100,000 -130,000 
Phosphodiesterase 115,000 
5'-Nucleotidase 100,000 
Phosphomonoesterase 100,000 
Ribonuclease 15,900 
Hyaluronidase > 60,000 
NAD-nucleosidase 100,000 
Arylamidase 100,000 
Endopeptidase 21,400 - 95,000 
Arginine ester hydrolase 27,000 - 30,000 
Kininogenase 33,500 
Thrombin-like enzyme 28,000 - 33,000 
Factor X activator 78,000 
Factor V activator 20,000 
Prothrombin activator 56,000 
Table 1.1 lists the enzymes found most commonly in snake venoms together with 
their MWt. 
Many venoms contain components that affect nerve function, and these include 
postsynaptic or presynaptic toxins. Curaremimetic postsynaptic neurotoxins, 
consisting of either 60-62 amino acids ("short") or 70-75 amino acids ("long"), bind 
to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors localised at the skeletal muscle endplate and, 
thereby, prevent the depolarising action of acetylcholine (Dufton and Hider 1983). 
To-date about 70 such toxins have been isolated from elapid and sea snake venoms. 
Presynaptic neurotoxins inhibit or potentiate transmitter release from motor nerve 
terminals, and have been isolated from elapid (-bungarotoxin, notexin and taipoxin), 
crotalid (crotoxin and mojave toxin), and viperid venoms (caudoxin, ammodytoxin 
A, B and C, and viperotoxin). 
Cytotoxins can affect many kinds of cell, causing haemolysis, cytolysis, 
depolarisation of muscle membranes and specific cardiotoxicity by interacting with 
membrane phospholipids. Cardiotoxic polypeptides, or sarafotoxins, are low 
molecular weight (7kDa) basic polypeptides commonly found in venoms from cobras 
and Atractaspis microlepidota. Bradykinin-potentiating peptides comprise only 5 to 
12 amino acid residues; they potentiate the depressor activity of bradykinin and this 
effect is also mediated by inhibition of the carboxypeptidase that converts 
angiotensin I into angiotensin II. Both these actions will cause a fall in blood 
pressure. 
Snake venom polypeptides that induce skeletal muscle contracture or produce local 
myonecrosis or myoglobinuria are categorised as myotoxins. Myotoxins contribute to 
local tissue destruction, affecting skin and muscle layers. In addition to 
nonenzymatic myotoxins, phospholipase A2 and haemorrhagic proteinases may also 
damage muscle cells. Some snake venoms can inhibit and others stimulate platelet 
aggregation. Nonenzymatic inhibitors (disintegrins) have been isolated from many 
venoms and various enzymes also have an effect on platelet function. The so-called 
"cobra venom factor" (CVF) is a nonenzymatic, nontoxic protein of molecular 
weight I40kDa found in the venom of cobras which, in the presence of a plasma 
cofactor, inactivates the human complement factor C3. CVF has been used as a tool 
in research on complement and illustrates the value of snake venom proteins for 
investigating physiological processes. 
In addition, snake venoms contain inorganic substances, such as sodium, calcium, 
potassium, magnesium, zinc, and small amounts of iron, cobalt, manganese and 
nickel. The importance of the metal content is not known, although zinc ions are 
necessary for anticholinesterase activity, and calcium plays a role in the activation of 
phospholipase AZ and the direct haemolytic factor. Some of the proteases are 
metalloproteins. Most snake venoms also contain small amounts of carbohydrates 
(glycoproteins), lipids (primarily phospholipids), biogenic amines (serotonin and 
histamine), nucleotides (adenosine, guanosine and inosine), nucleosides and free 
amino acids. 
1.2.3 Treatment of Snake Bite 
First-aid treatment of snakebite should include reassurance and immobilisation of the 
patient and bandaging the bitten limb to delay systemic absorption of venom during 
transport to the nearest hospital. Incision and suction have been shown to extract only 
small amounts of venom and then only if carried out within a few minutes of the bite 
(Reid, 1972). Medical treatment may include tetanus antitoxin and blood transfusion 
and, for the first night, analgesics may be necessary. 
In systemic snakebite poisoning, specific antivenom is the most important 
therapeutic agent available. If used correctly, it can be effective, even when its 
adminstration is delayed hours or even days after the bite. The rational indication for 
giving antivenom is clinical evidence of systemic poisoning. For example, neurotoxic 
signs plus local swelling (not due to a ligature) might indicate the need for cobra 
antivenom while haemorrhage indicates the requirement for a viperine antivenom. 
Non-clotting blood can be a sensitive sign of systemic poisoning and a useful means 
of differentiating systemic envenomation by different snakes (Reid, 1972). Thus 
Echis poisoning will be accompanied by non-clotting blood, whereas the venom of 
the puff adder does not affect clotting (Reid, 1972). The circumstances of the bite 
and generalised myalgia indicate the need for a sea snake antivenom. 
Monospecific antivenoms (section 1.4.4) should always be given if available and if 
the snake species responsible for envenomation is known. Many people urge the 
development of specific diagnostic tests to elucidate the species of snake involved so 
as to enable correct choice of a monospecific antivenom. Using a monospecific 
product is especially important in neurotoxic poisoning because polyvalent 
antivenoms are usually less potent against elapid than against viper venoms. In many 
tropical countries these distinctions are academic as regards choice of antivenom 
because, as in Saudi Arabia, only one a polyspecific antivenom is available. Serum 
sensitivity may be assessed by injecting 0.2m1, or less, of the antivenom 
subcutaneously. If a severe reaction occurs within minutes, antivenom may be 
contraindicated, unless the morbidity and mortality associated with the particular 
envenoming is high (Reid, 1972). However, the predictive value of skin tests is 
unreliable as an indicator of hypersensitivity and adrenaline should be available in a 
syringe for immediate injection if an antivenom reaction occurs despite negative tests 
for sensitivity. 
Antivenom is usually administered by slow intravenous infusion, but it has been 
shown that the incidence of early anaphylactic reactions is the same when undiluted 
antivenom is injected as a bolus intravenously. Antivenom should always be given 
intravenously, if possible, because this is the most effective and safest route (Reid, 
1972).. In the future it may be possible to give Fab antivenoms intramuscularly or 
subcutaneously when medical staff are not available, for example while hiking far 
from a large town. Thus the small molecular weight of the Fab antibody fragment 
(section 1.4.2) should readily allow its re-distribution into the general circulation. 
In viper envenomation, the effect of the antivenom should be assessed by checking 
the ability of the blood to clot. This should be done at six hourly intervals after the 
initial dose and a further dose of antivenom should be administered whenever the 
blood fails to clot. Deaths from delayed haemorrhages are well known. 
Antivenoms currently available in Saudi Arabia are manufactured by Behringwerke 
AG (Germany) and Pasteur-Merieux (France). Both are polyspecific equine (Fab)2 
for the Near and Middle East and the Middle East and North Africa respectively. 
There is no specific antivenom available against Atractaspis microlepidota venom 
(Coppola et al., 1992) and neither of the polyspecific antivenoms is effective against 
Walterinnesia aegyptia bites (Dowling et al., 1968). In the event of severe 
envenomation by the latter snake, it may be possible to reverse curare-like paralytic 
effects by administering neostigmine (Naphade et al., 1977) but atropine should be 
given first to counteract muscarinic activity. Finally, Tiger Snake antivenom from 
CSL (Australia) is used paraspecifically to treat sea snake envenoming (Baxter and 
Gallichio, 1974). 
1.2.4 Laboratory Diagnosis 
Laboratory tests are important in helping establish the diagnosis and in assisting 
management and treatment of snake bites. The initial assessment should include 
pulse and respiration rate, blood pressure, temperature, skin discoloration, and the 
presence and extent of oedema. Haematological tests should include blood grouping 
and cross-matching, clotting and clot retraction times, and complete red and white 
cell, and platelet counts. The erthyrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), prothrombin time 
and arterial blood gases are also of importance. 
The demonstration of noncoagulating blood is the single most valuable test in Echis 
envenomation and, as stated earlier, the test should be repeated every six hours after 
the first dose of antivenom until clotting is re-established (Reid, 1972).. Following 
this the test should be repeated daily for three days to ensure that coagulability is 
maintained and no further venom has been absorbed from the bite site (Reid, 1972). 
In severe cases, changes in urine composition (protein, blood, glucose, urea and 
creatinine) should be monitored as well as any cardiac abnormalities by 
electrocardiogram and by determining serum levels of creatinine phosphokinase. 
Plasma electrolyte assays are required and a low bicarbonate concentration reflects 
the metabolic acidosis that is a feature of severe experimental viper bite poisoning. 
Potassium levels are sometimes raised. 
Specific snake venom antigens can be detected in wound aspirate, swabs or biopsies, 
serum, urine, cerebrospinal fluid and other body fluids. Enzyme immunoassy has 
been the most widely used technique (Theakston et al., 1977). In Saudi Arabia there 
is no commercial test available, but immunoassay has proved a valuable tool in the 
clinical investigation of snake bite (Warrell, 1995). 
1.3 SAUDI ARABIAN VENOMOUS SNAKES 
1.3.1 Classification and Geographical Distribution 
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) and the surrounding areas are inhabited by a 
number of venomous snakes that are of potential medical importance. Indeed several 
of the world's most lethal snakes are found, with the venomous varieties being 
divided into four families: Elapidae, Hydrophiidae, Viperidae and Atractaspidae 
(Gasperetti, 1977). Vipers cause most of the snakebites to humans and, of the ten 
venomous species of land snakes, the sand viper (Cerastes gasperettii) is the most 
frequently observed and carpet vipers (genus Echis) are thought to be responsible for 
most of the serious bites and for most of the occasional deaths. 
There are two species of elapids in Saudi Arabia namely Naja haje arabica, the 
arabian cobra (Figure 1.1.1) and Walterinnesia aegyptia (Figure 1.1.2). The former 
located in the mountainous areas of the southern half of the Kingdom (Figure 1.2.3) 
and the second in the northern and central regions (1.2.7) where they are found close 
to villages but tend to stay in bushes, rocky areas, and rodent burrows. They prey 
mostly on reptiles and amphibians but will also eat small mammals and birds. 
The Arabian cobra is mainly diurnal and is the largest snake in the region, with a 
maximum length of 2.5m, accounting for its Arabic name of "hannish thaiban" 
(snake of snakes). Its colour varies from golden yellow to brown or grey and it was 
represented on the crown of the Pharaohs. The snake's head is flat and its neck can 
flare widely to form the characteristic hood. 
Walterinnesia aegyptia (Inns cobra or the desert black cobra) has a small, flat head 
and grows to about 1.2m in length. The snake's scales are glossy and this helps 
distinguish it from the dull scales of the cobra. It inhabits gardens and irrigated areas, 
but can also be found on rocky hillsides and in sandy desert regions with little 
vegetation. It is partly fossorial (Reid, 1972). 
There are 10 species of sea snakes (family Hydrophiidae) present in the Arabian 
Gulf, Gulf of Oman, Arabian Sea and Gulf of Aden but none has been found in the 
Red Sea. Their venom is highly toxic and induces paralysis and rhabdomyolysis but 
they are not aggressive and their short fangs make significant envenomation a rarity. 
Vipers are the most important snakes in Arabia from the medical standpoint and have 
a highly sophisticated system to deliver venom. Thus they have hollow fangs situated 
in the front of the mouth which function like hypodermic needles and are capable of 
3'D PARTY 
COPYRIGHT 
MATERIAL 
EXCLUDED FROM 
DIGITISED 
THESIS 
PLEASE REFER TO 
ORIGINAL TEXT 
TO SEE THIS 
MATERIAL 
penetrating deep into subcutaneous and muscular tissues. The fangs fold into the roof 
of the mouth at rest but are erectile and become almost perpendicular in the biting 
mode. 
Three species of saw-scaled or carpet vipers (genus Echis) are currently recognised 
on the Arabian peninsula (Gasperetti, 1988; Cherlin, 1990). Echis carinatus 
sochureki (the carpet viper) is distributed as shown in Figure 1.2.1 and is reddish- 
brown with a pretty white pattern which accounts for its common name of carpet 
viper (Figure 1.1.5). Echis coloratus (Burton's viper or the saw-scaled viper) (Figure 
1.1.4) is found in Egypt, Lebanon, Jordan, Palestine, and the Arabian Peninsula 
(Figure 1.2.6). Saint-Hilaire carpet viper (Echis pyramidum) is also seen in Saudi 
Arabia (Russell, 1991). When threatened, their bodies characteristically inflate and 
serrated scales rasp against each other and produce a sound like a saw cutting wood. 
Loud hissing and a savage strike follow this display. These snakes move with great 
speed and agility and can inflict the most catastrophic of bites. Their head is broad 
and distinct from the neck with a white arrow-like marking of four points: three 
directed posteriorly and one anteriorly. Their colour is tan to olive brown with white 
spots undulating laterally on the back and they attain a length from 0.4 to 0.8m. Echis 
species are nocturnal in the summer and diurnal in the winter and find shelter in 
almost anything from rodent burrows to rock fissures. 
Bitfis arietans, the puff-adder, is found in the mountainous areas of Saudi Arabia as 
well as throughout Africa (Figure 1.2.4) and has been described as the greatest killer 
of man (Dowling et al., 1968). Its head is very distinct and the eyes are vertically 
elliptical (Figure 1.1.7). A diagonal light-coloured band is located from the posterior 
aspect of the eye to the corner of the mouth. The colour of the snake may vary from 
yellow to brown or black but alternating dark and light chevrons on the back are 
unique and help to differentiate this snake from others. It is a fat snake which attains 
a length of about 1.5m. The puff-adder is nocturnal, slow-moving and usually 
inhabits grasslands where they are easily trodden upon. When such an accident 
occurs, it strikes rapidly, afflicting a most dangerous bite (Russell, 1991). 
Cerastes gasperettii, the sand or homed viper, is the commonest venomous snake in 
the Kingdom (Figure 1.2.5). The head is flattened and distinct from the neck, and the 
pupils are vertically elliptical (Figure 1.1.6). These snakes escape their predators by 
sinking into the sand by the use of lateral scales which have serrated angled keels 
capable of removing sand from under the animal and placing it over them. Upright 
spines or supraorbital horns serve to keep the eyes free of sand. The snake's colour is 
yellow to light brown with dark rows on the dorsum and its colour matches the sand 
of the region. It attains a length of about 0.75m and can be found in and places, near 
rocks, or in rodent burrows. It is nocturnal and travels using a side-winding motion. 
Saudi Arabia hosts two subspecies belonging to the family Atractaspididae: 
Atractaspis microlepidota andersonii and Atractaspis microlepidota engaddensis 
(Figure 1.1.3). The main taxonomic difference between the two is that the former has 
a fully divided nasal scale while in engaddensis the nasal scale is divided in the 
lower half only. The scale counts in engaddensis are also higher. They are very 
similar in appearance with a small head, long fangs, tiny round eyes, and a black 
body and they range in length from 0.5 to 0.6m. They are nocturnal and are found 
often in inhabited areas rather than in the desert. They have a sophisticated venom 
delivery system with a unique biting action. Fang erection can occur independently 
on either side of the mouth and occurs by cranial kinesis of the anterior skull 
elements, which permits a limited rotation of the fang bearing maxillary upon the 
prefrontal bone. Atractaspids are dangerous snakes to handle and must not be picked 
up by gripping them behind the head, as with other snakes, because they can inflict a 
venomous bite backwards, downwards or sideways. Branch (1981) suggested that 
they should be called "side-biting snakes" whereas Broadley (1983) called them 
"stiletto snakes" and Kochva et al. (1982) suggested "burrowing asp". The Arabs call 
them "al-aswad", meaning "the black one". 
Pseudocerastes persicus (the Persian horned viper) possesses supraorbital horns, 
composed of several small scales, in contrast to the single upright spine or "horn" of 
C. cerastes. Vipera lebetina, or the levantine viper, is sluggish and appears to be 
unaware of stimuli during the day. At night the animal may strike quickly and 
savagely and is an important cause of snake bite in the Middle East. 
The photographs and geographical distributions of these Saudi Arabian snakes were 
adapted from Al-Sadoon and Farraj (1992). 
1.3.2 Clinical Manifestations 
The symptoms, signs and gravity of snake envenomation are dependent upon many 
factors including (a) the age, size and general health of the victim, (b) the nature, 
location, depth and number of bites, (c) the amount of venom injected, (d) the species 
of snake involved, (e) the condition of the fangs and venom glands, (f) the victim's 
sensitivity to the venom, (g) the pathogens present in the snake's mouth, and finally 
(h) the speed and type of first aid received initially and the subsequent medical care. 
It is customary to divide the manifestations of snakebite into local and general. 
Venom poisoning may also be classified as minimal, moderate or severe. 
Following envenoming, spread of the various components depends, to a large extent, 
on their molecular weights. Thus Reid and Theakston (1983) showed that most of the 
toxic constituents of viper venoms have a large molecular weight and are absorbed 
only slowly, via the lymphatic system, to give maximum serum levels after 6 to 24 
hours. By this time significant amounts were present in urine. In contrast, elapid 
venoms, with their smaller molecular weight components, are absorbed much faster 
via the capillaries and peak serum levels are attained within 60 minutes (Sutherland 
et al., 1981). 
The main clinical patterns of snakebite poisoning in human victims are often 
distinctive, with viper venoms being chiefly vasculotoxic, those of elapids 
neurotoxic, and those of sea snakes myotoxic. Elapid poisoning is severe if 
neurotoxic signs start within one hour or less of the bite. Although no proven bites 
have been reported by the Arabian cobra (N. h. arabica), the effects of its venom 
probably resemble those of the Egyptian cobra (N. haje). The latter have a powerful 
neurotoxin in their venom and have killed humans within two hours despite the use 
of antivenom (Warrell et al., 1976). There is also some local necrosis in cobra bites 
and occasional cardiotoxicity. The venom of the desert black cobra (W. aegyptia) 
lacks cardiotoxic properties but is extremely neurotoxic and Dowling and colleagues 
(1968) described local pain and swelling with fever, general weakness, headache, 
nausea and vomiting. Sea snake bites produce no local pain or swelling but, after a 
few hours, there is generalised pain and stiffness of muscles, trismus, ptosis, bulbar 
and respiratory paralysis, myoglobinuria and life threatening hyperkalaemia (Reid, 
1979). 
The venom of A. microlepidota causes mostly local irritation and oedema. However, 
fever, vomiting, and haematuria are seen in severe cases, and deaths have been 
reported (Mehrtens, 1987). The sequelae of A. engaddensis envenoming are 
haemorrhagic, neurotoxic and cardiotoxic (Ovadia, 1987) and coronary vasospasm 
has been reported as cause of death (Lee et al., 1989). 
B. arietans venom causes massive local swelling that frequently involves the entire 
limb, with bruising, blistering, enlarged tender regional nodes and necrosis. Systemic 
effects include a mild coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia and spontaneous intra- 
abdominal bleeding. Shock results from hypovolaemia caused by extravasation of 
plasma into the bitten limb (Chapman, 1968; Warrell, 1995). 
The bite of C. cerastes is painful but usually not serious and is rarely fatal. In Saudi 
Arabia, ARAMCO Medical Department treated 26 cases of presumed C. cerastes 
bites in 10 years; less than half needed hospital admission and there were no fatalities 
(Warrell, 1993). 
Echis species are responsible for many fatalities and untreated envenomation is 
associated with a 7% to 15% mortality rate (Warrell et al., 1974 and 1976). Transient 
haemostatic failure, which may include disseminated intravascular coagulation, 
prolonged clotting time, hypofibrinogenemia and increased fibrin split products, is 
the hallmark of Echis envenomation (Rechnic et al., 1962; Yatziv et al., 1974). 
Haemostatic failure due to E. coloratus venom is less severe than that caused by E. 
carinatus (Fainaru et al., 1974; Mann, 1978). Oedema is the most reliable sign of 
Echis envenoming and may be evident within 20 minutes. In severe envenoming, the 
oedema tends to spread over the entire extremity and sometimes into adjacent parts. 
In severe systemic poisoning, acute renal failure is a serious complication; it may 
occur with bites by all types of poisonous snakes and may require dialysis. Death is 
usually most rapid after elapid bites (average time about five hours after the bite), 
and most protracted after viper envenoming (where the average is two to three days 
after the bite). Death due to sea snake bites usually occurs 12 to 24 hours after the 
bite and, as in elapid bite, is mainly due to respiratory failure. Shock and 
haemorrhage into vital organs are the main causes of death in bites from a viper. 
1.3.3 Biological Effects 
The composition and toxicity of snake venoms within a species may vary 
geographically and seasonally and differences may occur in specimens collected "the 
same day on the same hilltop" or "from under the same rock" (Minton and Minton, 
1969). The median lethal dose test (LD50) introduced by Trevan (1927) has gained 
wide acceptance as a measure of acute toxicity, although its original purpose was to 
determine and standardise biological potency. The LD50 is determined by 
constructing a curve showing the relationship between dosage and mortality, and the 
dose that would be expected to kill 50% of the animals is read from this curve. The 
most lethal Saudi Arabian venom is that of A. microlepidota; however the venom 
yield is low compared with N. h. arabica and B. arietans (Table 1.2). Various 
investigators have devised simplified procedures to obtain equally accurate and 
reproducible results for the LD50 with fewer animals (Reed and Muench, 1938; 
Lichfield and Wilcoxon, 1949; Meir and Theakston, 1986). One problem is the 
difference in susceptibility of animals to the lethal effect of venom which also varies 
with the species, sex, age and weight of the tested animal and the route of 
administration of the venom. The WHO (1981) recommends the iv route. 
Generally, for the more common laboratory animals, the order of sensitivity to the 
lethal toxicity of a snake venom is pigeon > guinea-pig > mouse > rabbit and rat 
(Brazil, et al., 1966; Chang and Lee, 1977; Glenn and Straight, 1982). Pigeons were 
used extensively for toxicity testing during earlier investigations (Sewall, 1887), but 
mice are presently the most common species employed and their use is recommended 
by the WHO (1981). Male mice are more susceptible than females (Aird and Kaiser, 
1985) and l6g mice are more sensitive than 25g mice (Russell, 1983). Generally, 
mice of one sex with body weights ranging between 18 to 22g are used to determine 
the mouse LD50 of snake venoms and the ED50 of antivenoms (WHO, 1981). 
Some snakes kill their victim by causing muscular and respiratory paralysis due to 
the presence of neurotoxic components in their venoms. In vitro, these toxins induce 
Table 1.2 Comparative Toxicity of the Venomous Snakes Found in Saudi Arabia 
Venoms Venom yield Reported Injection Estimated Reference 
(mg) Mouse LD50 Route LD man 
(g) (mg/70kg) 
Echis 25-35 24 iv 3-5 Minton and Minton, 1969 
pyramidum 19 iv Theakston and Reid, 1983 
38 iv 
18 iv 
Echis 
- 9 iv - Wieser et al., 1984 
coloratus 25 iv Theakston and Reid, 1983 
5 Ovadia and Kochva, 1977 
12 Gitter et al., 1962 
Bitis arietans 160-200 7 iv 90-100 Minton and Minton, 1969 
20 iv Theakston and Reid, 1983 
Cerastes 20-45 13 iv 40-50 Minton and Minton, 1969 
cerastes 5 iv Theakston and Reid, 1983 
9 iv Hassan and Hawary, 1975 
Walterinnesia 25 6 ip - Gitter et al., 1962 
aegyptia 
Naja haje 175-300 5 ip 15-20 Minton and Minton, 1969 
arabica Mohammed et al., 1973 
Atractaspis 4-10 2 iv - Wieser et al., 1984 
microlepidota 
Table 1.2 lists the approximate venom yield obtained by milking each of the seven species of 
snake studied in this thesis together with the LD50 of the venoms in mice using the intravenous 
(iv) or intraperitoneal (ip) route of administration. 
neurotoxicity and myotoxicity in isolated nerve-muscle preparations with a reduction 
in contractile response to stimulation. Rat, mouse and guinea pig diaphragms, frog 
sartorius muscle, guinea pig ileum, and other preparations have been used 
extensively to demonstrate neurotoxic and myotoxic activities of the snake venoms. 
Snake venoms contain two types of haemolytic factors. One is a direct haemolytic 
factor (DHF) which, although itself only weakly haemolytic, acts synergistically with 
phospholipase A2 (Lee, 1971). The other is an indirect factor which lyses red cells 
only slowly and its lytic activity can be enhanced by the addition of serum or 
phosphatidylcholine. Some venoms contain both factors (such as cobra venom) while 
others (such as crotalid venoms) contain only the indirect factor. It was believed 
initially that the haemolytic activity is due to phospholipase A2 causing hydrolysis of 
phospholipids to liberate fatty acids and lyso-derivatives which haemolyse red blood 
cells. 
Snake venoms are refered to as "coagulant" or "anticoagulant" depending upon their 
primary effect on clotting mechanisms and some venoms contain both activities. 
Snake venoms have four general types of action (Denson, 1969); (1) activation of 
Factor X, (2) conversion of prothrombin to thrombin in the presence of Factor V, (3) 
conversion of prothrombin to thrombin in the absence of Factor V, and (4) direct 
conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin. The thrombin-like action on fibrinogen depletes 
plasma fibrinogen with formation of microclots which are different from ordinary 
fibrin clots and are rapidly lysed by the fibrinolytic action of tissues, resulting in 
prolonged defibrinogenation and prevention of coagulation (Tu, 1982). Thus, the 
venoms are coagulants in vitro but anticoagulants in vivo. 
In Echis envenoming, fibrinogen levels are severely depleted while fibrin 
degradation products are increased. Factors II, V, VIII, X and XIII are also depleted 
(Warrell et al., 1975). In 1988, Kamiguti and colleagues reported that the venom of 
E. carinatus pyramidum from Saudi Arabia was a poor activator of prothrombin and 
contained a calcium-dependent Factor X activator, unlike venom from E. carinatus 
from India, Iran, Oman, Nigeria and Kenya. 
The in vitro coagulation assay is performed by mixing the venom with plasma or a 
fibrinogen solution and recording the clotting time. The minimum clotting dose 
(MCD) can be defined as the least amount of venom which clots a standard human 
plasma or fibrinogen solution in 60sec at 37C (Theakston et al., 1982). The 
defibrinogenating assay is performed in vivo, the venom being injected (iv) into mice 
and the plasma fibrinogen concentration being measured after 60min (Theakston and 
Reid, 1983). The minimum defibrinogenating dose (MDD) can be defined as the 
minimum amount of venom that results in a decrease of the fibrinogen level to 10% 
of the standard plasma level, or as the least amount of venom producing non-clotting 
blood (Theakston et al., 1982, Theakston and Reid, 1983). 
Studies have shown that Bitfis species venom contains the protein bitistatin which 
inhibits plalelet aggregation and prolongs the bleeding time in human and canine 
models (Shebuski et al., 1989). Echis venom contains echistatin, which is also a 
powerful inhibitor of platelet aggregation (Gan et al., 1988). Further studies on Bitis 
venom revealed a kinin-releasing enzyme capable of hydrolysing insulin and 
fibrinogen (Sekoguchi et al., 1986). The venom induces platelet aggregation and 
contains both coagulant and anticoagulant components (El-Asmar et al., 1986; 
Soslau et al., 1988). 
A. microlepidota venom contains sarafotoxins which have 60% homology with the 
endothelins, the endogenous vasoconstrictor peptides. In humans, envenoming 
causes acute anaphylactic symptoms and ECG changes consistent with the coronary 
vaso-constriction and atrioventricular block produced by sarafotoxins, (Alkan and 
Sukenik, 1975). 
Most of the toxic elements in the Arabian venoms are enzymes which can act in a 
number of ways; (1) local capillary damage and tissue necrosis is caused by 
phospholipases, hyaluronidases, and proteolytic enzymes, (2) diverse coagulant and 
anticoagulant actions result from various proteinases and phospholipases, and (3) 
acute hypotension and pain are induced by the release of vasoactive peptides by 
kinin-releasing enzymes. Snake venoms contain many types of proteases, including 
endopeptidases, peptidases, and proteases with limited specificity (such as thrombin- 
like enzyme, arginine ester hydrolase, prothrombin activator, Factor X activator, and 
kininogenases). Venoms that are rich in protease activity produce marked tissue 
destruction and may cause coagulation, haemorrhage, necrosis and fibrinolysis. 
1.4 ANTIVENOMS 
Antivenoms have been used for neutralising venoms from snakes, scorpions and 
spiders for just over a century. In addition, exogenous antibodies have been used to 
provide passive immunity against infectious agents, as antidotes to toxins, and to 
prevent the rejection of transplanted tissue. All uses of antibodies in biology and 
medicine have been complicated by the difficulty of generating large amounts of 
specific antisera by conventional immunisation; the unpredictability of the immune 
response; the immunogenicity of minor contaminants; and the heterogeneity of even 
highly specific antibodies. 
1.4.1 Antibody Structure 
Antibodies or immunoglobulins are a group of glycoproteins which constitute about 
20% of all the proteins present in serum and tissue fluid of mammals. Essentially 
they are bifunctional; one region (the Fab fragment) recognises foreign cells and 
macromolecules (antigen) while a different region (the Fc fragment) mediates the 
activation of complement, and binding to macrophages and white cells, which helps 
eliminate microrganisms. 
There are five general classes of antibodies; IgM, IgG, IgA, IgD and IgE with 
molecular weights ranging from 150 to 900kDa. IgG comprises about 75-85% of the 
antibodies of a normal person (Figure 1.3). The immunoglobulins differ from each 
other in size, charge, amino acid composition and carbohydrate content, but have the 
same basic structure comprising two identical light and two heavy polypeptide chains 
held together by non-covalent forces and by interchain disulphide bridges. Each 
chain consists of one sequence of amino acids and contains one or more intrachain 
disulphide bond. There is considerable amino acid homology between these various 
chains and they are all folded into a three-dimensional structure with a distinctive Y 
shape. 
In any one molecule all the light chains are identical as are the heavy chains and the 
entire molecule is symmetrical about its long axis. The N-terminal domain of each 
chain shows much more variation in its amino acid sequence than the other domains 
and is known as the variable region to distinguish it from the relatively invariant 
constant regions. The variable portion is different for each specific antibody, and it is 
this portion that attaches specifically to a particular antigen. The constant portions of 
the antibody determine most of its gross physical and chemical properties and 
establish such factors as adherence of the antibody to specific structures within the 
tissues, attachment to the complement complex and the ease with which the 
antibodies pass through membranes. 
1.4.2 Antibody Fragments 
Many proteolytic enzymes have been used to cleave immunoglobulins, including 
pepsin, plasmin, bromelain, chymotrypsin, trypsin, elastase and papain. In 1939 Pope 
used the proteolytic enzyme pepsin to cleave immunoglobulins into F(ab)2 and Fc. 
Pepsin is the main proteolytic enzyme involved in gastric digestion in mammals and 
birds, and its optimal action is at acidic pH. The portion of the polypeptide chain of 
3'D PARTY 
COPYRIGHT 
MATERIAL 
EXCLUDED FROM 
DIGITISED 
THESIS 
PLEASE REFER TO 
ORIGINAL TEXT 
TO SEE THIS 
MATERIAL 
the IgG molecules relatively accessible to proteolytic enzymes is called the hinge 
region and is situated between the CHI and CH2 domains of the heavy chain. 
Papain is one of the sulphydryl proteases isolated from the latex of the green fruit of 
Carica papaya. It consists of a single 212 amino acid polypeptide chain and has a 
MWt of 23.4kDa. It is activated by thiol compounds like cysteine and by metal- 
binding agents such as EDTA, while its activity can be terminated irreversibly by 
iodoacetamide. It functions best at neutral pH. Papain cleaves the IgG molecule into 
three fragments of similar size, namely two Fab fragments and one Fc fragment each 
of approximately 50kDa. An Fab comprises four separate domains, consisting of 
110-120 amino acids. Each domain has one three-stranded and one four-stranded 
segment joined by a single disulphide bond, while an interchain disulphide bond 
covalently couples CHI to CL. The Fc fragment readily crystallises out of solution 
and is composed of the C-terminal halves of the heavy chains. 
If pepsin is used, digestion occurs a little closer to the C-terminus than with papain. 
Thus the inter heavy-chain disulphide bridges are preserved and a large F(ab)2 
fragment (approximately IOOkDa MWt) is released. Being divalent, this fragment 
will precipitate antigen. Pepsin also extensively degrades the Fc fragment. 
The affinity constants (K) of the fragment may decrease with the size of the fragment 
in the order IgG > F(ab)2 > Fab ( Ferrone et al., 1988). Nevertheless Fab fragments 
have a number of advantages over IgG. First, they are not associated with type III 
hypersensitivity reactions because, with only one antigen binding site, they do not 
form immune complexes. This contrasts with F(ab)2. Second, lacking the Fc region, 
they do not bind complement or macrophages which helps eliminate vasoactive 
amine release (Smith et al., 1979). Third, because of its large molecular weight IgG 
is cleared by cells of the immune system, whereas some Fab is eliminated via the 
kidney. Finally, IgG has a volume of distribution similar to the plasma volume, while 
Fab fragments (because of extracellular space penetration) have a value some eight to 
nine times greater (Smith et al., 1979; Sullivan 1987). Owing to their smaller size, 
Fab fragments also distribute around the body more rapidly; this, in conjunction with 
their greater distribution volume, helps ensure their importance as therapeutic agents. 
1.4.3 Monoclonal and Polyclonal Antibodies 
A polyclonal antiserum is the conventional product of an immunised animal. After 
immunisation a venom antigen will, according to the clonal selection theory of 
immunity (Burnet, 1959), bind with the best fitting antibody structures, found as cell 
membrane receptors on precursor lymphocytes. Binding to its receptor stimulates 
each particular lymphocyte to multiply and give rise to a clone of memory and of 
antibody-secreting cells. Venom generally consists of a large number of components. 
Each component may have many epitopes and new epitopes may be created through 
their metabolism by the host animal. The specificity of an antivenom results from the 
selection of the B-lymphocyte repertoire by the venom antigens. Thus a polyclonal 
antivenom contains the products of many responding clones of cells and is, in 
consequence, heterogeneous at many levels, including the classes and subclasses 
(isotypes) of the antibodies produced and their specificity, titre and affinity. The 
significance of such heterogeneity within and between polyclonal antisera in practice 
means that each antivenom is unique in its specific antibody composition. In general, 
polyclonal antibodies are easy and simple to produce and they have high affinity for 
antigen. 
In 1975 Khler and Milstein developed an alternative method for antibody 
production which yields monoclonal antibodies. These are derived from a single 
antibody producing cell clone, immortalised by fusion to a tumour cell line to form a 
hybridoma. The secreted antibody is homogeneous in specificity, affinity and isotype 
and each monoclonal product is specific to a single antigenic determinant (epitope) 
of the immunogen. In principle each monoclonal antibody can be prepared in 
unlimited amounts. One major disadvantage of monoclonal antibodies is that, due to 
their monospecificity, they lack or have only poor antigen-precipitation and 
neutralisation properties. They also require considerable investment in time and 
equipment. At present, monoclonal antibodies are unsuitable for elapids antivenom 
production because venoms contain such a large number of constituents. Some 
workers have suggested that the best interim arrangement is to develop defined 
polyclonal antibodies using mixtures of monoclonal antibodies, thus recognising all 
the circulating isoforms until their unique roles can be determined. As mentioned 
above most of the very high affinity antibodies that have been produced have been 
polyclonal. This situation is changing with improved fusion and selection protocols 
but the high cost of monoclonal antibodies represents a real problem, especially for 
the developing world where envenoming claims most of its victims. 
1.4.4 Monospecific and Polyspecific Antivenoms 
When only one species of venomous snake occurs in a particular area, the choice of 
antivenom is simple and animals may be immunised with one venom to produce a 
monospecific antivenom. When more than one species of venomous snake exist a 
mixture of two, or more, of the different venoms may be used for immunisation to 
provide a polyspecific antivenom ("polyvalent" in USA). A monospecific antivenom 
is greatly to be preferred when the offending snake is known or its venom has 
identified by a specific diagnostic test. Polyspecific products are useful when the 
offending snake is not known and this is common in countries with several poisonous 
snakes, which includes most tropical countries. 
The victim may not be able to identify accurately the snake and it 
is for this reason 
that the majority of antivenoms are polyspecific. They provide a 
broad but reduced 
cross-reactivity against a number of snakes and difficult choices are avoided. 
However, there are a number of arguments against this approach. 
With the ability to 
produce only a limited number of antibodies in any one 
host animal, combining 
complex mixtures, such as snake venoms, may result in some components failing to 
elicit an immune response or, conversely, all antigens eliciting only a weak response. 
Also, because many venom components share elements of secondary structure, those 
of low molecular weight that are weakly immunogenic or in low concentration may 
be selected against, in favour of the larger more immunogenic components. Finally, 
the large number of possible epitopes may also severely immunocompromise the 
host animal since so many antibodies may be directed against the venoms that only a 
few may remain to provide protection against environmental pathogens. 
If four venoms of equal immunogenicity were mixed in equal amounts to form the 
immunogen, the resulting antivenom should in theory provide only 25% of the 
protection afforded by a similar monospecific antivenom against any one snake. 
However, because the venoms used usually show a high degree of cross- 
neutralisation, this figure is often much higher (Theakston and Smith, 1995). A 
second approach, which we adopt, is to mix monospecific antisera, each produced in 
separate animals. This method maximises the possible number of available antibody- 
producing cells and, in theory, should provide a wider range of specific antibodies. 
Nevertheless, because these antisera are then mixed, a dilutional effect is produced, 
the magnitude of which is dependent on the number of monospecific antisera 
included in the product. Such dilution should, in theory, reduce the effectiveness of 
the product but, again because many venoms are highly cross-reactive, the dilution 
effects are often much reduced. Studies comparing the ability of polyspecific, 
monospecific and mixed monospecific antivenoms to neutralise the activity of 
various venoms have shown that, as anticipated, monospecific products offer the best 
protection, and mixed monospecific antivenoms are, in general, better than 
polyspecific antivenoms (Smith et al., 1992). 
1.5 REQUIREMENTS FOR PRODUCTION OF ANTIVENOMS 
1.5.1 Animal 
Antisera against snake venoms intended for therapeutic use have occasionally been 
raised in goats (Cohen and Seligmann, 1966; Mohammed et al., 1966; Russell et al., 
1970; Kochalaty et al., 1971). However, historically all commercial snake 
antivenoms are prepared in horses (Minton, 1974). The use of horses for the 
production of therapeutic sera was first described by Roux and Martin (1894) and 
they were the natural animal to choose at the turn of the century when they were 
available in vast numbers. Horses are also easy to handle, thrive in most climates, 
yield large volumes of serum, and methods of purifying and processing horse serum 
are well-developed. Big horses are obviously preferable because of their larger blood 
volume, but breed and age are not important. Tetanus is a common disease among 
horses, and they should be immunised prophylactically against the relevant organism 
and/or toxin. 
A risk of some untoward reaction is attached to the injection of serum from any 
animal, and horse serum has gained a particularly bad reputation in this respect. This 
is, in part, probably because it has been more widely used than sera from other 
animals. The incidence of the delayed type of reaction, serum sickness, has been 
drastically reduced by the introduction of pepsin-digested antibodies lacking Fc but 
horses have an immunoglobulin class, termed IgGT, which increases considerably 
following immunisation (Fernandes et al., 1991) and is particularly immunogenic. 
In this study antivenoms were raised in sheep. There are both practical and 
theoretical reasons for considering sheep as a suitable replacement for horses. Sheep 
are widely available, inexpensive and easy to handle. They are more resistant to 
disease, have a rapid immune response and usually attain high circulating levels of 
antibodies. Because the immune response in sheep is predominantly of the humoral 
type (antibody producing), immunisation with Freund's complete and incomplete 
adjuvants does not induce a severe local reaction (Sjstrm et al., 1994). In addition, 
sheep immunoglobulin is easy to cleave by pepsin and by papain, producing less 
allergic and less immunogenic F(ab)2 and Fab fragments respectively. 
1.5.2 Immunogen 
Substances which can induce an immune response (humoral, cellular, or mixed T and 
B cells) when introduced into an animal are called immunogens. Certain conditions 
must be satisfied in order for a molecule to be immunogenic. The molecules should 
be foreign to the host. As a general rule, molecules smaller than 1 kDa are only 
weakly immunogenic and macromolecular proteins with MWt greater than 100kDa 
are the most potent immunogens. A molecule must possess a certain degree of 
complexity and immunogenicity increases with structural complexity. Finally, the 
ability to respond to a particular immunogen varies with the genetic constitution of 
the animal being immunised. 
The quality of an antivenom depends, in part, on the initial venom pool used as 
immunogen. Thus the composition of a venom varies with respect to age of the 
snake, its geographical distribution and the season. Ideally the venom should be a 
pool from the whole distribution area, collected at different times of the year, and 
from snakes of mixed age and sex. Venoms contain many components and the best 
immunogens are those present in high concentrations and of large molecular weight. 
It is sometimes stated that antigen competition may result in a low antibody response 
to some components. In the case of important low molecular weight toxins, for 
example in elapid venoms, it may be necessary to isolate the toxin for use either to 
supplement the venom used as immunogen or to produce separate antibodies directly 
towards the toxin to supplement the final antivenom (Sells et al., 1994). 
1.5.3 Adjuvant 
Adjuvants are agents used to potentiate the immune response and, customarily, they 
are administered with the antigen but this is not always the case. Theoretically 
adjuvants may act by one or more of the following mechanisms: (1) directly 
increasing the number of cells involved in antibody formation, (2) ensuring a more 
efficient processing of the antigen, (3) prolonging the duration for which the antigen 
is maintained in the immunised animal, and (4) increasing the synthesis and release 
of antibody from the antibody-forming cells. 
Some of the different adjuvants used in the past for antivenom production include 
chalk, mineral oils, lipopolysaccharides from gram-negative bacteria, saponin, yeast, 
aluminium phosphate, aluminium hydroxide gels, sodium alginate, bentonite and 
Freund's adjuvants. Freund's complete (a suspension of killed Mycobacterium in a 
mixture of paraffin oil and an emulsifying agent) and incomplete (lacking the 
Mycobacterium) adjuvants used in this study are classic examples of water-in-oil 
emulsion adjuvants. 
Venom has also been incorporated into liposomes and New and colleagues (1985) 
showed that a single injection of E. carinatus venom incorporated into 
sphingomyelin-cholesterol liposomes could produce a high antibody response in 
mice, rabbits and sheep. They also suggested that oral ingestion of liposome 
entrapped venom could be used for active immunisation in areas with a high 
incidence of snake bites. 
1.5.4 Immunisation Protocol 
Hyperimmunisation has been the procedure most commonly employed for producing 
antivenoms for the last 100 years since antivenoms were first produced. It is based on 
the historical findings of Sewall (1887) who demonstrated active immunisation of 
pigeons using increasing amounts of a rattlesnake venom injected over the course of 
a month. This demonstration had a profound influence on the thinking of von 
Behring and Kitasato (1890) and Calmette (1894a, b), and they used a similar 
hyperimmunisation technique to produce immune sera in horses against diphtheria 
and tetanus toxins and against cobra venom, for therapeutic use. 
The procedure involves immunising a host with repeated injections of increasing 
doses of immunogen given at weekly or still shorter intervals. It is possible that this 
procedure may be necessary to induce an immune response to the smaller and less 
immunogenic components of a venom or those present at very low concentrations 
especially in the period before adjuvants were developed. However, it is expensive in 
terms of venom and the amounts given might be sufficient to induce tolerance. 
In this work, a low dosage immunisation procedure was used for producing 
antibodies to the venoms collected from Saudi Arabian snakes. To find the optimal 
immunisation dose for each venom, dose-response studies were performed. The 
sheep were initially immunised with 0.5mg of venom and the dose was then doubled 
every four weeks for some of the sheep so that 1mg or 4mg were being injected until 
the maximum response was obtained. 
1.5.5 Antiserum Collection and Processing 
Blood is collected under aseptic conditions and allowed to clot. Cellular components 
are separated by centrifugation and the serum is collected and may be heated for 
30min at 56C to destroy complement and fibrinogen. The serum may then be salt 
precipitated to yield an IgG-rich fraction largely devoid of albumin. Ammonium 
sulphate is commonly used for this purpose. However in this work sodium sulphate 
was employed because it results in a pellet that is more easily reconstituted 
containing lower levels of albumin, and avoids the addition of potentially toxic 
ammonium ions. It has also been suggested that ammonium sulphate irreversibly 
denatures immunoglobulin, reducing the yield of viable antibodies (Sullivan, 1987). 
Some producers of antivenom still use intact IgG or even unprocessed serum or 
plasma for the treatment (Theakston and Warrell, 1991). However, to overcome 
hypersensitivity reactions, most antivenom manufacturers digest immunoglobulin 
using pepsin to produce bivalent F(ab)2 fragments which lack the C terminal Fc 
domains (Latifi, 1978). A more recent development in immunotherapy is the use of 
Fab fragments produced by digesting IgG with the plant enzyme papain. 
The total immunoglobulin fraction of any immune serum will, by definition, contain 
antibodies that are directed against molecules other than the immunogen. These 
antibodies comprise the background complement of immunoglobulins acquired by 
the animal during its lifetime and, as such, are of no therapeutic benefit to the patient. 
Sheep antisera typically contain about 25g of immunoglobulin per litre, of which 
only a quarter to a third can be expected to be specific to the immunogen (Smith et 
al., 1992). Thus if the total immunoglobulin fraction is administered, the non- 
effective molecules simply increase the burden of foreign protein given to the 
envenomed patient and the possible risk of side-effects. It is for this reason that 
affinity chromatography techniques have been applied in recent years to enable the 
isolation of antibodies specific only to the venom components. 
Such procedures are based on antigens (in this case a venom) bound to an inert 
matrix over which the antivenom is passed. Specific antibodies or fragments bind to 
the venom on the matrix while non-specific components pass through. The matrix 
may then be washed and the specific antibodies or fragments eluted. Although 
affinity purification has long been used as a means of isolating antibodies to specific 
venom components, it was Russell and colleagues (1985) who first pointed to this 
technique as a means of reducing antivenom doses. Using polyacrylamide as a 
support matrix they showed that material produced in this way was more effective in 
neutralising lethal, haemorrhagic, coagulant, platelet-aggregating, necrotising and 
neurotoxic activities than the starting material. 
1.6 ASSESSMENT OF ANTIVENOMS 
The primary role of any antivenom is to have a significant effect in reducing 
morbidity and mortality in humans. The general techniques applied to antivenoms 
include physicochemical assessment of purity, measurement of binding activity and 
assessment of ability to neutralise the biological and enzymatic venom activities. The 
concentration and purity of antivenoms can be assessed by methods such as FPLC, 
reversed radial immunodiffusion and SDS-PAGE. As venoms are complex mixtures 
of toxins with different pharmacological and pathological activities, the antivenom 
should ideally be titrated against each important activity. 
1.6.1 Binding Assays 
These are a group of closely related in vitro assays which involve the non-covalent, 
high affinity and reversible binding of a ligand by a specific binding protein of 
biological origin. Such assays are subdivided primarily according to the binding 
protein employed. Thus immunoassays employ specific antibodies, while binding 
protein assays use naturally occurring plasma proteins, and receptor binding assays 
employ proteins that are usually extracted from the organ (s) which is targeted by a 
drug or toxin (Chard, 1990). 
Immunoassays are the most common form of binding assay and are based on the 
non-covalent reversible binding of an antigen by a specific antibody. They have been 
introduced for the detection and determination of a variety of macromolecules and 
haptens in biological fluids. They can be categorised into those in which no labelled 
reactant is required and those employing labelled antigen or antibody. In non-labelled 
immunoassay, the antibody-antigen complexes are detected and measured directly. 
Precipitation immunoassays are the most commonly employed of these, and depend 
upon the antibodies precipitating antigens from solution by formation of a lattice of 
cross-linked antibody-antigen molecules. This precipitate can be measured directly in 
solution, or after precipitation in agar or agarose. Such procedures are widely used to 
assess antivenoms, with double immunodiffusion being one of the simplest and 
earliest techniques used. (Russell, 1967; Greenwood et al., 1974). However, these 
assays are relatively insensitive and time consuming. 
Labelled immunoassays employ either labelled antigen or antibody and can be 
categorised into isotopic and nonisotopic immunoassays. The isotopic assays employ 
gamma or beta emitting isotopes as labels and can be further subdivided into 
radioimmunoassays (RIA) in which labelled antigens are employed and 
immunoradiometric assays (IRMA) which require isotopically labelled antibodies. 
Non-isotopic immunoassays employ either antigens or antibodies labelled with a 
nonisotopic substance such as an enzyme or a fluorescent molecule. Another 
example is passive haemagglutination, using reagent labelled with erythrocytes, 
which was used by Boche and Russell (1968) to assess both venom and antivenom; 
however the assay has disadvantages including the instability of the labelled reagents 
and imprecise end-point determination (Theakston, 1983). 
RIA was first developed by Yalow and Berson (1960) for the quantitation of insulin. 
In 1974, Coulter and his colleagues developed a solid phase RIA using 
125I-labelled 
venom, for the detection of Australian snake venoms in biological samples. This 
technique has been used by many investigators to detect venoms or venom toxins in 
biological samples (Greenwood et al., 1974; Sutherland et al., 1975). A sandwich 
IRMA, using 125I-labelled antibody raised against snake venom, has been used by 
other investigators (Sutherland and Coulter, 1977a, b; Coulter et al., 1978). Both RIA 
and IRMA are reproducible, sensitive, and can be used to detect and assess both 
venom and antivenom levels in biological samples. Their disadvantages include the 
short shelf life of the isotopically labelled reagent and the expensive counting 
equipment required. The techniques also require considerable technical expertise. 
Enzyme-labelled immunoassays employ enzyme-labelled reagents. Those which 
employ labelled antigens are called enzymeimmunoassays (EIA) while those 
employing labelled antibodies are called immunoenzymometric assays (IEMA) 
(Smith et al., 1981). Traditionally, both EIA and IEMA performed in microtitre 
plates are called "Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays" 
(ELISA). The type of 
ELISA introduced by Theakston and his colleagues, in 1977, is the most commonly 
used method in snake venom and antivenom research and involves the use of coated 
microtitre plates or tubes. There are two systems. The double-sandwich ELISA 
performed by adding venom to antibody coated plates ("capture antibodies"), 
washing, and then adding a specific antibody directed against the venom and 
conjugated to an enzyme, such as horseradish peroxidase or alkaline phosphatase 
("labelled antibodies") followed by a substrate. The second approach involves 
coating the plates with venom and adding antivenom followed by a species-specific 
conjugated second antibody. The former methods have a great clinical potential 
detecting and identifying snake venoms, while the later are of great value 
in detecting 
and identifying assessing and standardising antivenoms (Theakston and Reid, 1979). 
Both systems are sensitive, reproducible and employ inexpensive and stable reagents. 
Theakston and Reid (1979) showed good correlation of in vitro ELISA titres and the 
in vivo ED50 in mice. However, some snake venoms possess peroxidase and alkaline 
phosphatase activity which may interfere with endpoint detection to give false 
positive results. Also, some preservatives inhibit the enzymatic activity of the 
conjugate and the assays are affected by temperature. 
The binding capacity of an antivenom depends upon its antibody titre and affinity. 
The titre is defined as the dilution which binds 50% of the label and indicates the 
relative abundance of relevant antibodies in a preparation. The higher the titre, the 
more potent and economical will be the use of the antiserum. The affinity 
(equilibrium) constant is the definitive thermodynamic characteristic of a binding 
site. The term affinity is used to describe the strength of binding between an antibody 
and an antigen. Thus high affinity can be seen as binding involving a lot of energy or 
lasting a long time. 
1.6.2 Neutralisation of Biological Activity 
The potency of an antivenom may be assessed by determining its ability to inhibit or 
neutralise the biological effect(s) of the venom using animals, organs from an animal 
or cells. Ideally, its lethality, neurotoxicity, myotoxicity and haemolytic and 
coagulation effects should be assessed since these are the most important toxic 
effects that may be induced by the venom. Potency of an antivenom is demonstrated 
by means of its ability to protect experimental animals from the lethal effects of the 
venom. The median effective dose (ED50) can be defined as the amount of 
antivenom required to protect 50% of tested animals from the lethal effect of a given 
amount of venom, usually two or five times the LD50. Results are expressed as mg of 
venom neutralised per ml of antivenom or by the number of LD50 neutralised by a 
given amount of antivenom. 
1.6.3 Neutralisation of Enzymatic Activity 
Numerous assays exist to assess the enzymatic activities of venoms. However, there 
have been few detailed studies of the neutralisation of these activities by antivenoms 
and this is another aim of the present study. Enzyme assays are simple and quick and 
can be subdivided into colorimetric and turbidometric assays. Colorimetric assays are 
based on the ability of enzymes or venoms to hydrolyse synthetic substrates either to 
liberate a coloured product (which can be measured spectrophotometrically) or to 
change the acidity of the solution (leading to change in a pH indicator). The former 
approach is the more common and is used to assess phosphodiesterase (Ballario et 
al., 1977) and L-amino acid oxidase (Johnson et al., 1987; Ueda et al., 1988). The 
latter has been used to assay phospholipase A2 which hydrolyses a substrate, 
phosphatidylcholine, to lysophospatidylcholine and fatty acids (Canziani et al., 1982; 
Johnson et al., 1987). 
Turbidometric assays have been used widely to measure the activity of enzymes. 
They can be divided into those which act to inhibit the formation of a colloid and 
those which break it down once formed. For example, hyaluronidase inhibits colloid 
formation by stopping the cross linking of a substrate reagent comprising hyaluronic 
acid and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (Xu et al., 1982; Genge et al., 1985), 
while phospholipase A2 clears the turbidity of a suspension of egg yolk (Vidal and 
Stoppani, 1971). 
1.7 AIM OF STUDY 
To improve the production and assessment of antivenoms for use in Saudi Arabia 
where the existing antivenoms are produced by techniques which have hardly 
changed during the past 50 years. 
Antivenoms will be produced for the following species of snake: Cerastes cerastes, 
Walterinnesia aegyptia, Echis coloratus, Echis carinatus, Bitfis arietans, Naja haje 
arabica and Atractaspis microlepidota. 
CHAPTER II 
MATERIALS, INSTRUMENTATION AND METHODS 
2.1 MATERIALS 
2.1.1 Venom Collection 
The venoms used in this study were collected from snakes of many different regions of 
Saudi Arabia, which were housed and milked by members of the Department of Zoology, 
King Saud University, Riyadh. Their geographical distribution and the yields obtained by 
milking are listed in Table 2.1. The snakes were milked every three months by applying 
pressure to the venom glands and collecting the venom in a small beaker. The fresh venom 
was filtered and then lyophilised and stored in the dark at 4 C. Most venoms were yellow 
in colour but venom from B. arietans was white and that from N h. arabica only very 
slightly yellow. 
2.1.2 Antivenoms and Immunochemicals 
Pasteur-Merieux (Middle-East and North Africa) and Behringwerke AG (Near and 
Middle East) antivenoms were bought from their manufacturers. Normal horse and sheep 
sera, and donkey anti-sheep and sheep anti-horse sera were obtained from Polyclonal 
Antibodies Ltd (Dyfed, UK). Freund's Complete and Incomplete adjuvants were from 
Sigma (Poole, Dorset, UK). 
2.1.3 General Chemicals and Materials 
L-amino acid oxidase, ammonium acetate, adenosine diphosphate (ADP), ammonium 
persulphate, L-ascorbic acid, N-a-benzoyl-L-arginine-p-nitroanilide (L-BAPNA), 
albumin, bromophenol blue, 4-chloro-l-naphthol, Coomassie brilliant blue, cresol red, L- 
cysteine, o-dianisidine, N, N-dimethyl casein, ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA), 
fibrinogen, D-glucose, hexadecyl-trimethylammonium bromide (CTMBr), horseradish 
peroxidase, hyaluronic acid, iodoacetamide, leucine, mercaptoethanol, 3-(N- 
morpholino)propane sulfonic acid (MOPS), pepsin, o-phenylene-diamine dihydrochloride, 
L-a-phosphatidylcholine, p-nitrophenyl thymidine-5-phosphate, potassium carbonate, 
sodium chloride, sodium hydroxide, sodium periodate, tris(hydroxymethyl) methylamine 
and tetramethylenediamine (TEMED) were bought from Sigma (Poole, Dorset, UK). 
Table 2.1 Venom Yield and Geographical Distribution of Saudi Arabian Snakes 
N Northern region 
S Southern "" 
E Eastern "" 
W Western 
C Central "" 
Family name Species Venom yield per 
milking (mg) 
(Gasperetti, 1988) 
Geographical distribution 
Elapidae N. h. arabica 170-300 SW 
W. aegyptia 25 C, NE and N 
E. pyramidum 20-35 C, SW 
Viperidae E. coloratus 10-40 SW, C, E and N 
C. Gerastes 20-40 Throughout all the country 
B. arietans 160-200 SW 
Atractaspidae A. microlepidota 4-8 C, S and N 
Table 2.1 summarizes the amount of venom (in mg) obtained per milking and the 
geographical distribution of Saudi Arabian snakes. 
Acetic acid, agarose, acetonitrile, ammonium hydrogen carbonate, barbital buffer, 
bromocresol green, dimethyl sulfoxide, ethanolamine, gelatin, glycerol, glycine, 
hydrochloric acid, hydrogen peroxidase solution (30% v/v), methanol, potassium 
dihydrogen orthophosphate, potassium chloride, sodium acetate, sodium azide, sodium 
carbonate, sodium citrate, sodium dihydrogen orthophosphate, sodium dodecyl sulphate 
(SDS), sodium hydrogen carbonate, sodium nitrate, sodium sulphate, sodium tetraborate, 
sulphuric acid, thiomersal, trichloroacetic acid, 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid, 
Triton X- 100 and Tween 20 were all purchased from BDH (Poole, Dorset, UK). 
N, N-methylene-bis-acrylamide, magnesium sulphate, magnesium chloride, calcium 
chloride and urea were obtained from Aldrich (Gillingham, Dorset, UK). CNBr activated 
Sepharose 4B, electrophoresis calibration kit, electrophoresis film, filter paper and 
Superose 12 (HR 10/30) were obtained from Pharmacia LKB (Uppsala, Sweden). 
Standard endotoxin, pyrogen free water and Limulus Amebocyte Lysate were from 
Biowhittaker (Walkersville, USA). Papain was bought from Merck (Darmstadt, 
Germany), microtitre plates (Nunc) from Gibco BRL ( Renfrewshire, UK), Cut-off 
dialysis tubing (MWt 12 kDa) and nitrocellulose membranes from Sartorius ( Belmont, 
Surrey, UK). 
2.2 LIST OF GENERAL INSTRUMENTATION 
Blotting apparatus; model II-S Sartoblot, Sartorius ( Belmont, Surrey, UK) 
Centrifuge; MSE Mistral 6000 and 3000 Mistral (Sussex, UK) 
Cuvettes; I0mm ultra-UV disposable cuvettes from Elkay (Basingstoke, Hampshire, UK) 
Electrophoresis unit; model SE600 (standard size) and Mighty Small II, model SE250, 
Hoefer Scientific Instruments (San Francisco, USA) 
ELISA plate reader; Titertek multiscan plus MK II, Flow Laboratories (Lugano, 
Switzerland) 
ELISA plate washer; model S8/12, Flow Laboratories (Lugano, Switzerland) 
FPLC; comprising two P-500 pumps and an LCC-500 plus controller unit, Pharmacia 
LKB (Uppsala, Sweden) 
Freeze-drier; Hetosic, Heto Lab Equipment (Birkerod, Denmark) 
HPLC; High pressure liquid chromatography system, Shimadzu SPD-1OA (Kyoto, 
Japan) 
Incubator; model 6A2N from LEEC Ltd (Colwick, Nottingham, UK) 
pH meter; AGB-75, Labtech Instruments ( Wrexham, Wales, UK) 
Platelet aggregometer; Lumi-Aggregation Module, series 1000B, Payton Scientific 
(Milano, Italia) 
Power supply; model 400, Shandon, Southern Products Ltd (Runcorn, Cheshire, UK) 
Spectrophotometer; model 4050 Ultrospec II from LKB (LKB Biochrome, Cambridge, 
Vortex mixer; maxi-mix II from Clandon Scientific Ltd (Aldershot, Hampshire, UK) 
2.3 GENERAL METHODS 
2.3.1 Immunoglobulin Fractionation 
Serum (aproximately 1500m1) was first filtered through glass wool to remove solid and 
lipid material, then mixed with an equal volume of sodium sulphate (36% w/v) stirred for 
60 min and centrifuged at 2500g and 25C for 30min. The precipitate was twice re- 
suspended in sodium sulphate (18% w/v) and then redissolved to its original volume 
(aproximately 1500m1) in PBS (50mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, containing NaCl 
0.8% (w/v) and KC10.02% (w/v) and dialysed to remove any trapped salt at 4C for 48hr. 
2.3.2 Papain Digestion 
Proteolytic cleavage of immunoglobulins with papain was carried out as described by 
Porter (1959). The pH of approximately 500m1 of the immunoglobulin fraction was 
adjusted to 7.0 and after adding EDTA (0.8mg/ml of solution), papain (16% w/w of the 
total IgG weight) and L-cysteine (160mg/ml to activate papain) the reaction mixture was 
incubated at 37C for 24hr to ensure that most of the IgG had been digested. The reaction 
was stopped by adding iodoacetamide (2.8mg/ml) and the reaction mixture was dialysed 
(using dialysing tube with l2kDa MWt cut-off) against PBS to remove the low molecular 
weight reagents and finally centrifuged at 2500g and 25C for 30min to sediment the Fc 
fraction. 
2.3.3 Pepsin Digestion 
Digestion with pepsin was performed as described by Pope (1939). Aproximately 500m1 
of the IgG fraction was dialysed against acetate buffer (sodium acetate, 0.1 M, NaCl, 
10mM, pH 3.5) for l8hr at 4C or until the pH was 3.5. Pepsin (2% w/w of the total 
weight of IgG to be digested) was added, dissolved in a minimum amount of acetate 
buffer, and the reaction was allowed to proceed for 5hr at 25C with gentle shaking. The 
reaction was terminated by adding a saturated Tris free base solution until the pH reached 
7.5 after which the digest was dialysed against saline (NaCl, 9g/1) and centrifuged at 
2500g and 25C for 30min to sediment the Fc fragment. The supernatant was further 
purified by salt precipitation using sodium sulphate (section 2.3.1). 
2.3.4 Protein Concentration 
The protein concentration of immunoglobulin and its fragments as well as the venom 
solutions was assessed by the absorbance at 280nm using an extinction coefficient (1gll 
solution, 1 cm light path) of 1.5 for IgG, 1.45 for F(ab)2,1.4 for Fab and I for venom. 
2.3.5 Albumin Concentration 
Ovine albumin concentrations were kindly measured by Robert Bush (Therapeutic 
Antibodies Ltd, London) using a separation fluoroimmunoassay. Briefly, known 
concentrations of ovine albumin competed with a fixed amount of fluorescein-labelled 
ovine albumin for a limited and constant amount of specific antibody to obtain the 
standard curve. The sample containing an unknown amount of albumin was then run in 
the same way and the results read off the standard curve. The amount of albumin was 
expressed as a percentage of the weight of the protein. 
2.3.6 Fc Concentration 
Ovine Fc levels were kindly measured by Robert Bush (Therapeutic Antibodies Ltd, 
London) using a separation fluoroimmunoassay. A standard curve was constructed by 
allowing unlabelled ovine Fc to compete with a fixed amount of fluorescein-labelled Fc 
for a limited and constant amount of specific antibody. The amount of Fc in the sample 
was expressed as a percentage of the weight of protein in the samples. 
2.3.7 Immunoelectrophoresis 
Immunoelectrophoresis (IEP) was performed as described by Graber and William 
(1953). This technique separates molecules according to their charge, size and shape, 
followed by an immundiffusion step where the separated samples are brought into 
contact with antisera, to form an antigen-antibody complex which gives a precipitin 
line. Sample and standards (3l, 2.5g/1) were separated electrophoretically for 90min at 
150V in an agarose gel (2%w/v in barbital buffer, 8.6g/l, pH 8.6). Donkey anti-sheep 
IgG serum was then applied into the troughs and allowed to diffuse into the gel 
overnight. After washing with saline, proteins were visualised by staining with 
Coomassie brilliant blue I% (w/v). The IEP was used semi-quantitatively for measuring 
Fc since a precipitation band was visible at a concentration of 80mg/l but not at 40mg/I. 
2.3.8 Fast Protein Liquid Chromatography 
FPLC, employing medium pressure (1-1.5 mPa) and a cross linked agarose medium 
(Superose 12 HR 10/30,15cm length and 10mm diameter column, volume 25m1), ensured 
optimal separation of components with MWt between 1 and 300 kDa. All the buffers were 
de-gassed and the sample (1g/l) venom was dissolved in saline and centrifuged to remove 
any solid material. Approximately 200g was applied to the column and the appropriate 
sensitivity levels were set for measuring the eluted proteins with 154 mM NaCl at pH 5.5, 
flow rat at 0.5ml/min and the absorbance read at 280nm. To assess the molecular weight 
of eluted components, proteins of known size were applied to the column and their 
retention time plotted against the molecular weight (Figure 2.1). 
2.3.9 Reversed Phase High Pressure Liquid Chromatography 
Saudi Arabian venoms were analysed by HPLC reversed phase chromatography. 
Approximately 200g of lmg/ml venom was applied to the column (Supelco RP LC-8- 
Figure 2.1 Calibration Curve for the Superose 12 FPLC Gel Filtration Column 
106 1 Thyroglobin (699kDa) 
Gamma Globulins (15OkDa) 
Albumin (66kDa) 
Carbonic Anhydrasa (29kDa) 
104 10 
Aprotinin (6.5kDa) 
m Uridine (244.2kDa) 
89 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 
Time (min) 
A calibration curve for the FPLC Superose 12 column was obtained by running 
proteins of known molecular weight. Their retention times were measured and plotted 
against their MWt and the best curve was fitted using linear regression. 
DB, 15cm length, 4.6mm diameter and 5nm beads), which was equilibrated with 5% 
(v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The components were eluted 
with a gradient of 90% (v/v) acetonitri le in 0.1 % (v/v) TFA at a flow rate of 0.5mllmin 
and the absorbance read at 280nm. 
2.3.10 SDS-PAGE 
SDS-PAGE was performed according to the method of Laemmli (1970) using a water 
cooled, discontinuous, vertical slab gel system comprising a stacking gel (10% v/v 
acrylamide) and a resolving gel (10% v/v acrylamide). Either a standard size or a mini gel 
system was used; the advantage of the latter was that it gave a faster running time (Ihr 
compared with 3-4hr) and used less protein (10g protein per well compared with 40g). 
The resolving gel was prepared by mixing the stock solutions (Table 2.2) and adding 
TEMED immediately before pouring the gel followed by methanol on top to exclude 
oxygen. After polymerisation (20min) the methanol was replaced with the stacking gel 
(Table 2.2) and an appropriate comb was inserted. The sample was mixed with an equal 
volume of either non-reducing sample buffer (Tris 25mM, pH 6.8, containing SDS 2% 
w/v, glycerol 16% v/v and bromophenol blue 0.01% w/v) or reducing sample buffer 
(containing mercaptoethanol 4% v/v). Electrophoresis was performed in running buffer 
(Tris 25mM, pH 8.3, containing glycine 0.2M and SDS 0.1% w/v) using 20mA/gel until 
the tracking dye had entered the resolving gel and then 40mA. The gels were used either 
for Western blotting (section 2.4.1.3) or stained with Coomassie brilliant blue (1 % w/v in 
destaining solution) for l hr, destained (methanol : acetic acid : water, 4: 1: 5 v/v) until the 
background was clear, and then dried and photographed. 
2.3.11 Sterility 
Sterility was assessed by inoculating 1 ml of antivenom into thiogllycolate and tryptic soya 
broths (20m1) which encourage and support the growth of anaerobic, aerobic and 
facultative bacteria, yeasts and moulds. The thiogllycolate broth was incubated at 32.5  
2.5C and the tripticase soya broth at 22.5  2.5C for 14 days and both were observed for 
growth indicated by the presence of turbidity. 
Table 2.2 Mixing of Reagents for SDS-PAGE 
RESOLVING GEL: 
REAGENTS VOLUME 
stand. system 
VOLUME 
mini system 
Tris buffer (1M, pH 8.8) 11.25 ml 1.9 ml 
SDS solution (10% w/v) 0.3 ml 50 pl 
Acrylamide/bis-acrylamide, (30%, 29.15g acrylamide +0.858 
N, N'-methyiene-bis-acrylamide per 100ml) 
10 ml 1.66 ml 
Water 7.75 ml 1.3 ml 
Ammonium Persulphate (1.5% w/v) 0.7 ml 116 l 
TEMED (N, N, N', N'- 
tetram ethylened iam ine) 
30 pl 541 
STACKING GEL: 
REAGENTS VOLUME 
Stand. System 
VOLUME 
Mini System 
Tris buffer (1 M, pH 6.8) 1.2 ml 360 pl 
SDS solution (10% w/v) 0.1 ml 30 l 
Acrylamide/bis-acrylamide, 
stock solution (30%) 
1.5 ml 450 l 
Water 6.7 ml 2 ml 
Ammonium persulphate (1.5% w/v) 0.5 ml 150 l 
TEMED 20 I 5 tl 
Table 2.2 lists the reagents used for preparing SDS-PAGE with the top table 
showing the reagents used for preparing the resolving gel and the bottom table 
those used for preparing the stacking gel. 
2.3.12 Bacterial Endotoxin Test 
A semi quantitative test for gram-negative bacterial endotoxin was used. The LAL reagent 
(Limulus amebocyte lysate) was reconstitued with low endotoxin water and mixed in 
equal parts (10l) with doubling dilutions of the sample. After incubation for l hr, the 
presence of endotoxin causes coagulation. The lowest dilution displaying coagulation was 
compared with standards and expressed in EU/ml. Controls are needed because, if the 
sample causes inhibition of gel-formation, the test is not valid. 
2.4 ASSESSMENT METHODS 
2.4.1 Binding Assays 
2.4.1.1 Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay 
To assess antibody titres, plates were coated with venom (2. tg/ml, 100tUwell) dissolved 
in coating buffer (NaHCO3,0.1M, pH 9.6 containing 0.1% w/v thiomersal) for 2hr at 
37C. Plates were then washed three times with 3001/well of washing buffer (sodium 
phosphate 10mM, NaCl 0.8% w/v, KCl 0.02% w/v, thiomersal 0.01% w/v and Tween 20, 
0.1 % v/v, pH 7.4) using an automatic plate washer. Two-fold serial dilutions (which will 
be refered to as doubling dilutions) of the antiserum (100l/well) dissolved in washing 
buffer were incubated in the venom-coated wells for lhr at 37C and, after washing, a 
second antibody directed against the first (viz donkey anti-sheep or sheep anti-horse as 
appropriate) and coupled to horseradish peroxidase was added (100 tl1well, diluted 1: 500 
in washing buffer). After being incubated for I hr at 37C and washing, enzyme substrate 
was added (1001iI/well of o-phenylenediamine, 0.01% w/v, dissolved in sodium citrate 
buffer, 0.07M, pH 5.0 containing H202,20U100 ml of a 30% v/v solution). The reaction 
was stopped after 10min with sulphuric acid (3M, 50. tl/well) and the optical density read 
at 492mn using an automatic ELISA plate reader. The antibody titre, defined as the 
dilution of antivenom which gave 50% of maximum binding, was calculated after 
correcting for non-specific binding by normal sheep serum (usually 4%). To minimise 
assay variation, a control sample for each antivenom was included and all samples were 
corrected for any variation. The between assay variation (CV) was 8% for E. pyramidum 
antivenom when performed on seven separate occasions. 
2.4.1.2 Small Scale Affinity Purification 
To isolate immunoglobulins specific to venom components, venom was coupled to 
Sepharose 4B activated with cyanogen bromide. The gel was first washed for 15 min on a 
sintered glass filter with dilute hydrochloric acid (1 mM) to remove preserving agents and 
swell the beads. After briefly washing with the coupling buffer (NaHCO3,0.1M, pH 8.3, 
containing 0.5M NaCl), the gel was incubated with the venom (5mg/g of dry gel) in a 
stoppered vessel overnight at 4C and any remaining active groups blocked with glycine 
(0.2M, pH 8.0). Non-bound venom was removed by washing with three cycles, each 
consisting of a wash with acetate buffer (0.1 M, pH 4, containing 0.5M NaCl) followed by 
a wash with Tris buffer (0. IM, pH 8, containing 0.5M NaCl). The affinity matrix was 
finally equilibrated with saline and stored at 4C. All the eluants were checked for protein 
by OD280t,,,, to ensure that the venom components had bound covalently. To determine its 
maximum binding capacity, the column was incubated with different amounts of 
immunoglobulin for two hr at rt and any unbound material was removed by washing with 
PBS. The bound antibody was then eluted with glycine (10mM, pH 2.5) and dialysed 
against saline (0.9% NaCl w/v) overnight to raise the pH and remove glycine (Figure 2.2). 
2.4.1.3 Western Blotting 
Venom was studied as described by Towbin and colleagues (1979). Venom was separated 
on 10% SDS-PAGE gel (0.35mg protein on a mini system, 1.2mg on a standard system) 
using non-reducing sample buffer. Part of the gel was stained with Coomassie blue (as 
reference) and the remainder of the proteins was transferred to nitrocellulose paper 
(0.45mm pore size) with a horizontal semi-dry blotting system using 0.8mA/cm2 for 2hr. 
During transference the gel and nitrocellulose paper were surrounded by filter paper 
soaked in blotting buffer (Tris 25mM, pH 8.3 containing glycine 0.2M and 20% v/v 
methanol). Staining the SDS-PAGE gel with Coomassie blue 1% (w/v) after transference 
showed that the low MWt bands had been displaced but some of the high MWt 
components remained. 
Figure 2.2 Small Scale Affinity Purification of Equine Antivenom (Pasteur) 
Amount applied, mg 
Figure 2.2 shows the binding capacity of increasing amounts of the Pasteur antivenom 
for venoms from E. pyramidum (A), E. coloratus (0), W. aegyptia (Y), N. h. arabica 
("), C. cerastes (*) and B. arietans (") coupled to a solid phase matrix. The bound 
antibodies were eluted with glycine (10mM, pH 2.5) and the protein concentration 
read at 280nm. The Pasteur antivenom contained the highest concentration of specific 
antibodies against E. pyramidum and the lowest against W. aegyptia venom. 
0 10 20 40 
After transference, non-specific sites on the nitrocellulose paper were blocked with gelatin 
for 30min (Tris 50mM, gelatin 0.4% w/v, Tween 20,0.05% v/v, pH 7.5). and, after 
washing (Tris 50mM, Tween 20,0.05% v/v, pH 7.5), the paper was cut into strips and 
incubated with antivenom (200mg/1) for 1 hr at rt. After washing, the strips were incubated 
for l hr at rt with the appropriate second antibody coupled to horseradish peroxidase, 
diluted 1: 500 in washing buffer and the strips were then incubated with substrate (4- 
chloro-l-naphthol 0.02% (w/v) dissolved in citrate buffer 0.07M, pH 5, containing 0.05% 
of a 30% v/v H202) until the bands were well developed (about 10min) when they were 
finally washed in water and photographed. 
2.4.2 Enzymatic Assays 
2.4.2.1 Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) Activity 
A cresol red method was used (Canzaini et al., 1982) in which the substrate solution was 
prepared by dissolving L-u-phosphatidylcholine extracted from egg yolk (0.4% w/v, 
initially 120mg dissolved in 1 ml methanol), Triton X- 100 (1 % v/v) and cresol red (0.1 % 
w/v) in a salt solution (NaCl 100mM, KCl 100mM and CaC12 10mM, adjusted to pH 8.5). 
This solution (2.8m1) was mixed with venom (1001) and either buffer or antivenom 
(100l) and the decrease in absorbance due to the released fatty acid was followed at 
573nm. The initial reaction rate was proportional to the venom concentration and the 
amount of venom used (25-0.254g) was adjusted so that the decrease in absorbance could 
be followed easily. There was some spontaneous hydrolysis of the substrate which was 
assessed and subtracted from the readings and PLA2 activity was expressed as the decrease 
in absorbance per min per mg venom. The within assay variation (CV) measured 10 times 
using E. pyramidum venom was 6% and the between assay variation, performed on 10 
different occasions, was 8%. 
2.4.2.2 Hyaluronidase (HYL) Activity 
HYL was assayed by the method of Di Ferrante (1956). Hyaluronic acid 
in the presence of 
cetylmethylammonium bromide (CTMBr), precipitates to form a turbid solution. However 
when hyaluronate has been depolymerised no turbidity develops when 
CTMBr is added. 
Different concentrations of venom (50l) were mixed on microtitre plates with hyaluronic 
acid (501,0.05% w/v) and assay buffer (501 of 0.2M sodium acetate, pH 6, containing 
0.15M NaCl) or antivenom and incubated for 30min at 37C. The reaction was stopped by 
adding CTMBr (l501,2.5% w/v dissolved in 2% w/v NaOH) and the turbidity was read 
within 10min at 405nm using an automatic ELISA plate reader. Hyaluronidase activity 
was expressed as the amount of venom required to reduce the initial turbidity by 50% 
(Figure 2.3). For neutralisation experiments doubling dilutions of the equine and ovine 
antivenoms (501) were pre-mixed for 30min at 37C with the amount of venom which 
reduced 50% of the absorbance at 405 nm. 
2.4.2.3 Proteolytic Activity 
2.4.2.3.1 Casein assay 
This was performed according to the method of Lin and colleagues (1969). Different 
concentrations of venom (20I, in saline) were added to dimethyl casein (1 ml, 0.1 % w/v 
in -3(N-morpholino propane sulphonic acid 
{MOPS} buffer, 5mM, pH 7.2) and incubated 
in a water bath at 38C for 30min and the reaction was stopped 
by immersing the test 
tubes in a boiling water bath for 5min. To detect the released amino acids, sodium 
bicarbonate (1 ml, 4% w/v solution, pH 8.5) and 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid (1 ml 
of a 0.1 % v/v aqueous solution) were added and incubated 
in a waterbath at 50C for 
30min. The reaction was stopped by adding hydrochloric acid (0.5m1, IM) and SDS (1 ml, 
10% w/v) and the absorbance was read at 340nm. All samples were assayed in duplicate. 
The proteolytic activity was expressed as mole of amino terminals released per g venom 
and was determined by dividing the absorbance at 340nm 
by 104, the extinction 
coefficient for most trinitrophenyl amino acids. The between assay variance (CV) 
for E. 
pyramidum venom performed on seven different occasions was 7%. There was no 
increase 
in absorbance if E. pyramidum venom was incubated without casein, showing that there 
were not enough amino acids in the venom to contribute to the reading. 
It was not possible 
to study the neutralisation of proteolytic activity using casein as substrate since the 
antivenom interfered with the assay. 
Figure 2.3 Hyaluronidase Activity of Saudi Arabian Venoms. 
Amount of venom, pg 
The hyaluronidase activities of increasing concentrations of venoms from E. 
pyramidum (U), E. coloratus (A), N. h. arabica ("), C. cerastes (*) and B. arietans 
(40) were measured using a hyaluronic acid substrate in the presence of CTMBR. 
Activity is expressed in the terms of % reduction in initial turbidity at 405nm. At 
50% hydrolysis E. coloratus venom had the highest activity and E. pyramidum venom 
the lowest. 
0 20 40 60 80 100 200 
2.4.2.3.2 L-BAPNA assay 
Proteolytic activity was also measured using L-BAPNA (N-(x-benzoyl-L-arginine-p- 
nitroanilide). The substrate (5mg/ml, 100l) was mixed on a microtitre plate with assay 
buffer (l O01,0.1 M sodium phosphate, containing O. 1M KCI, pH 6.8) or antivenom and 
venom solution (10041), incubated for 60min at 37C and the absorbance at 405nm was 
recorded using an ELISA plate reader. The activity was expressed as the increase in 
absorbance at 405nm per mg venom. 
2.4.2.4 L-Amino Acid Oxidase (L-AAO) Activity 
L-AAO was measured by a method (Ueda et al., 1988) in which riboflavin is oxidised, 
producing H202 that activates horseradish peroxidase to enable the conversion of o- 
dianisidine to oxo-dianisidine with an absorbance maximum at 530nm. L-Leucine (0.1ml, 
0.1 M), the substrate for L-AAO, was incubated with o-dianisidine (0.1 ml, 0.25% w/v 
dissolved in dimethyl sulphoxide), horseradish peroxidase (0.1m1,0.004% w/v), venom 
solution (0.1 ml) and assay buffer (2.6m1,0.1 M sodium phosphate, pH 6.8) or antivenom 
for 1 hr at 37C. The reaction was terminated by adding sulphuric acid (2m1,50% v/v) and 
the samples were left standing for 30min before the absorbance was recorded. Only 
freshly dissolved venom samples were used, as L-AAO is known to be very unstable. L- 
AAO activity was expressed as the increase in absorbance at 530nm per mg venom. For 
neutralisation experiments, doubling dilutions of the equine or ovine antivenoms were pre- 
mixed for 30min at 37C with venom. 
2.4.2.4 Phosphodiesterase Activity 
Phosphodiesterase activity was measured as described by Ballario and colleagues 
(1977). The synthetic substrate p-nitrophenyl thymidine-5'-phosphate (PNPT-5'-P) is 
hydrolysed with the liberation of 4-nitrophenyl phosphate which gives a yellow colour. 
The assay was performed in disposable polystyrene cuvettes by incubating venom 
solution (100g 1), assay buffer (100l, Tris buffer, pH 8.5,0.1 M, containing MgC12,2 
mM and Tween-20,1 ml/1) and substrate (1.3m1, PNPT-5'-P, 0.07 g/1) for 30 min at at 
37C. The reaction was stopped (0.5ml, sodium hydroxide, 0.2M) and, after 10 min, the 
absorbance at 400nm was recorded (Figure 2.4). To measure inhibition, mixtures of 
venom and antivenom were assessed as described above and the percentage inhibition 
plotted against the amount of antivenom used. 
2.4.3 Biological Assays 
2.4.3.1 Indirect Haemolytic Activity 
Indirect haemolytic activity was assessed according to the method of Al-Abdulla and 
colleagues (1991) using human erythrocytes and phosphatidylcholine as substrate for 
venom phospholipases. The erythrocyte suspension was prepared from human blood 
(9ml: Iml 3.8% w/v sodium citrate) by centrifugation for 10min at 2000g and 25C, after 
washing the erythrocytes three times in buffer (Tris 1mM, pH 7.5, containing sodium 
citrate 0.38% w/v, NaCl 100mM, KCl 100mM and CaC12 10mM), they were resuspended 
in buffer (2.5% v/v). This preparation was used the same day it was prepared. The 
erythrocyte suspension (1 ml) was pre-incubated with assay buffer (2.9ml, Tris 1 mM, pH 
7.5, containing NaCl 100mM, KCI 100mM and CaCl2 10mM) and L-a- 
phosphatidylcholine (0.1 ml of a 1% w/v solution) for 30min at 37C with constant 
shaking to prevent cells from sedimenting. Venom solution was added (lml) and, after a 
further 30min incubation, the tubes were centrifuged at 25C and 2000g for 15min, and 
the absorbance of the released haemoglobin in the supernatant was read at 540nm. The 
indirect haemolytic activity was expressed as percentage haemolysis against mg venom. 
The within assay variance (CV) for seven samples of E. pyramidum venom was 8%. There 
was no direct haemolysis of human erythrocytes with any of these venoms (up to 1 g/1) if 
the lipid substrate was omitted. 
For neutralisation experiments the amount of venom inducing 100% haemolysis was 
incubated with doubling dilutions of the antivenom (0.5ml) for 30min at 37C and then 
mixed with the erythrocyte suspension. 
Figure 2.4 Phosphodiesterase Activity of Saudi Arabian Venoms. 
>% 6O 
Amount of venom, pg 
The phosphodiesterase activity of increasing concentrations of venoms from E. 
pyramidum ( ), E. coloratus (A), N. h. arabica ("), C. cerastes (*) and B. arietans 
(") was measured using the substrate p-nitrophenyl thymidine-5-phosphate (PNPT-5- 
P). Activity is proportional to the yellow colour produced due to the liberation of 4- 
nitrophenyl phosphate and is measured spectrophotometrically at 400nm. E. 
pyramidum venom showed the highest activity whereas venom from C. cerastes and B. 
arietans showed the lowest. 
05 10 15 20 25 
2.4.3.2 Platelet Aggregation 
2.4.3.2.1 Preparation of human PRP and PPP 
Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) was prepared from whole blood collected by venepuncture 
(9m1: 1 ml 3.8% w/v sodium citrate) by centrifugation at 250g for 10min and 25C which 
precipitated the white and red cells while leaving virtually all the platelets in the 
supernatant (PRP). Platelet-poor plasma (PPP), used for blanking the aggregometer, was 
prepared from the remaining blood by re-centrifugation at 1500g for 10min and 25C. The 
PRP was left standing for 30min before use and all experiments were completed within 
3hr after collection using plastic tubes and pipettes because glass (unless silanised) can 
induce aggregation. Blood samples were not taken if aspirin had been consumed during 
the previous 10 days. 
2.4.3.2.2 Measurement of platelet aggregation 
The aggregometer measured light transmission at 600nm which increases as platelets 
aggregate. Initially the base-lines were set using PRP (10% light transmission) and PPP 
(90% light transmission), with a chart speed of 2cm/min. All samples were pre-heated to 
37C, with magnetic stirring at 500rpm. The PRP (4501) was equilibrated until the base- 
line was stable after which the venom (50l) was added followed by ADP (20111,0.1 M) to 
induce aggregation. The between assay coefficient of variance for C. cerastes venom, 
performed on six different occasions, was 6%. For neutralisation experiments different 
amounts of the antivenoms raised against C. cerastes and B. arietans venoms were pre- 
incubated at 37C for 30min with venom before being added to the PRP. 
2.4.3.3 Coagulant Activity 
The minimum coagulant dose (MCD), defined as the least amount of venom that clots 
human plasma (MCD-P) or bovine fibrinogen (MCD-F) in 60 sec at 37C, was 
estimated as described by Theakston and Reid (1983). Venom (5041) and assay bufffer 
(50gl, Tris, 0.1 M, pH 7.5 containing NaCI, 9g/L) were mixed and 501 of this mixture 
was added to pre-warmed (37C) citrated human plasma or fibrinogen (200l, 2g/1) and 
the clotting time measured and plotted against the concentration of venom used. For 
neutralisation experiments, venom (501) was mixed with increasing amounts of 
antivenom and the volume made up to 100l with assay buffer. Then 501 of this 
mixture was added to the pre-warmed human plasma and the clotting time measured as 
above. Complete inhibition was assumed when no clot formation occured within 2hr, 
and zero inhibition when the clotting time was identical to that using venom alone. 
2.4.3.4 Minimum Haemorrhagic Dose (MHD) 
Haemorrhagic, necrotising and defibrinogenating activities were measured using the 
facilities of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (Liverpool, UK). MHD was 
measured as described by Theakston and Reid (1983) and is defined as the least amount 
of venom which, when injected intradermally into rats, results in a haemorrhagic lesion of 
10mm diameter 24 hours later. Different concentrations of venoms (0.1 ml in saline) were 
injected into the shaved dorsal skin of rats (male Sprague Dawley, 180-250g) under light 
halothane and oxygen anaesthesia. After 24 hours the animals were killed, the dorsal skin 
removed, and the diameter of the lesion measured on the inner surface of the skin, in two 
directions at right angles, using calipers and background illumination. Care was taken not 
to stretch the skin. The mean diameter of the haemorrhagic lesion was calculated for each 
venom dose and the MHD was estimated by plotting the mean lesion diameter against 
venom dose and reading off the dose corresponding to a 10mm lesion. For neutralisation a 
mixture of antivenom and the MHD of the venom was pre-incubated at 37C for 30min 
before being injected intradermally into rats. The haemorrhagic lesion was measured 24hr 
later. 
2.4.3.5 Minimum Necrotizing Dose (MND) 
The MND was measured as described by Theakston and Reid (1983) and is defined as the 
least amount of venom which, when injected intradermally into rats, results in a necrotic 
lesion of 5mm diameter three days later. The method used was the same as that for the 
MHD, except that the dorsal skin was removed three days after intradermal injection of 
venom. The MND was calculated by plotting the mean lesion diameter against the dose of 
venom and reading off the dose corresponding to a diameter of 5mm. For neutralisation 
studies different amounts of antivenom and the MND of the relevant venom were pre- 
incubated at 37C for 30min before being injected intradermally into rats as described 
above. 
2.4.3.6 Minimum Defibrinogenating Dose (MDD) 
The MDD, using whole blood, was defined as the minimum dose of venom that produced 
non-clotting blood within 60min of its intravenous injection and was measured as 
described by Theakston and Reid (1983). A wide dose-range of E. pyramidum, E. 
coloratus, E. ocellatus and W. aeAyptia venoms (100 gl in saline, pH 5.5) were injected 
intravenously into 4 adult male mice (Swiss Albino) weighing 20-25g. One hour after 
injection, the mice were anaesthetised with halothane and oxygen and bled by cardiac 
puncture. The blood was pooled and placed in a clotting tube and left at room temperature 
for l hr where the clot quality was recorded using a 1-5 grading system (Figure 2.5) 
according to Reid (1967). For neutralisation studies, different amounts of antivenom and 
the MDD of the relevant venom were pre-incubated at 37C for 30min before being 
injected into mice. 
2.4.3.7 Neurotoxicity and Myotoxicity 
The mouse hemidiaphragm preparation was used to determine the neurotoxic and 
myotoxic activities of N. h. arabica and W. aegyptia venoms. Venom alone or pre-mixed 
with antivenom, was added to such a preparation and the contractile activity of the muscle 
recorded after either indirect (nerve) or direct (muscle) stimulation. 
2.4.3.7.1 Nerve muscle preparation 
This was prepared as described by Blbring (1946). Adult male mice (Swiss Albino) 
weighing 25-30g were sacrificed by stunning, followed by exsanguination, and the left and 
right phrenic nerves located, dissected out and freed from connective tissue (Figure 2.6). 
The nerves and diaphragm, together with a rib and a piece of vertebra, were transferred to 
3" PARTY 
COPYRIGHT 
MATERIAL 
EXCLUDED FROM 
DIGITISED 
THESIS 
PLEASE REFER TO 
ORIGINAL TEXT 
TO SEE THIS 
MATERIAL 
a petri dish containing continuously oxygenated Krebs' buffer (containing NaCI 6.9g/l, 
KCl 0.3g/l, sodium bicarbonate 2. lg/l, potassium dihydrogen phosphate 0.2g/l, 
magnesium sulphate 0.3g/l, calcium chloride 0.3g/1 and glucose 2g/l, pH 7.4). The 
diaphragm was then cut into two segments and each was carefully arranged on a 
diaphragm holder, with the costal margin attached to the lower electrode on the holder 
with a piece of string attached to the central tendon. The phrenic nerves were carefully 
wrapped around two platinum wire electrodes and the preparation was then transferred to a 
100ml organ bath containing Krebs' buffer maintained at 37C ( 1 C) and equilibrated 
with a gas mixture of OZ (95%) and CO2 (5%). Contractions of the muscle were elicited 
either by stimulation of the nerve with a pulse of 1-10V for 0.1 ms duration at a rate of 
15/min or by direct stimulation of muscle with a pulse of 50V for 0.5ms duration at 
15/min. The tension was recorded isometrically by means of a force displacement 
transducer coupled to a Devices MX2 amplifier and recorder. 
2.4.3.7.2 Effects on the nerve-muscle preparation 
The neuromuscular blocking activity was determined by adding Krebs' buffer (60m1) 
containing venom and recording the contractions after stimulating the nerve (indirect 
stimulation). After 30min the venom was washed out and replaced by fresh Krebs' buffer 
every 30min. Each experiment was conducted for 240min, and all the values reported are 
means  SEM of four preparations. Control experiments (venom-free Krebs' buffer) 
showed that contractions fell by a maximum of 10% in 240min. For neutralisation 
experiments venom was pre-incubated with different concentrations of antivenom at 37C 
for 30min before being added to the nerve-muscle preparation. For control experiments, 
normal sheep serum was used. 
2.4.3.8 Lethal Toxicity 
Traditionally the toxicity of a venom is assessed in vivo using mice. To determine the 
50% intravenous lethal dose (ivLD50) of a venom, groups of mice receive increasing 
doses of venom dissolved in saline (total volume 2001) via the tail vein. Normally five 
groups of five male TFW mice (18-20g) were used and the number of survivors in each 
group were counted after 24hr. The doses were adjusted so the highest dose gave 100% 
mortality while all the mice survived at the lowest dose. To establish 50% of the protective 
amount of an antivenom (ED50), different amounts of the antivenom were pre-mixed for 
30min at 37C with 5 times the ivLD50 followed by the same procedure as described for 
LD50. Control animals were injected with only venom or antivenom (5 times the highest 
amount used). The analysis of the slopes of the dose-response regressions for the LD50 and 
ED50 was performed by the probit method (Finney, 1971). 
CHAPTER III 
CHARACTERISATION OF SAUDI ARABIAN VENOMS 
3.1 SUMMARY 
Saudi Arabian venoms were assessed for their physicochemical, enzymatic and 
biological activities. Each produced 8 to 14 bands on SDS-PAGE, using non-reducing 
conditions, with molecular weights ranging from 23 to above 94kDa. All the venoms 
showed high phospholipase A2 activity which decreased in the order E. coloratus > E. 
pyramidum = N. h. arabica > C. cerastes = B. arietans venom. All the venoms tested 
contained L-amino acid oxidase and E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms had the 
highest activity. Most also showed high hyaluronidase activity, decreasing in the order 
N. h. arabica = C. cerastes > E. coloratus = B. arietans > E. pyramidum. High 
proteolytic activity was found in E. pyramidum venom using both dimethylcasein and L- 
BAPNA as substrate. C. cerastes and B. arietans venoms showed low phosphodiesterase 
activity whereas the other venoms were highly active in this respect. 
Studies of the biological effects of the venoms revealed that E. coloratus venom had the 
highest indirect haemolytic activity, whereas B. arietans venom showed very little 
activity. C. cerastes and B. arietans venoms initiated platelet aggregation using human 
platelet-rich plasma. The coagulant activity of two Echis species (E. coloratus and E. 
pyramidum) venom assessed showed high activity. Both Echis species also had high 
haemorrhagic, necrotic and defibrinogenating activities. Using a mouse hemidiaphragm 
preparation, venom from N. h. arabica inhibited nerve stimulated muscle contraction but 
had no direct effect on the muscles. Lethality (iv LD50 ) in mice decreased in the order A. 
microlepidota > N. h. arabica > C. cerastes > B. arietans > E. coloratus > E. 
pyramidum. 
W. aegyptia venom activities are described in Chapter VI. 
3.2 PHYSICOCHEMICAL ASSESSMENT 
3.2.1 Reversed Phase Chromatography 
The results of reverse-phase HPLC of venoms from the four viper species found in 
Saudi Arabia are shown in Figure 3.1. E. pyramidum venom showed 10 peaks with 
retention times ranging from 14.3 to 31.3min, while, E. coloratus venom had 11 peaks 
with retention times from 14.3 to 25.8min. Different venom batches showed the same 
profile. C. cerastes venom showed 9 peaks with retention time ranging from 14.4 to 
26.3min and the first peak represented about 20% of the total components. Finally B. 
arietans venom had 11 peaks with retention times ranging from 5.1 to 27.4min and the 
total component found in the first peak represented about 72% of the total. 
3.2.2 Fast Protein Liquid Chromatography 
The results of fast flow chromatography of 2004g of each of the five venoms are 
shown in Figure 3.2. The molecular weights of the peaks were estimated from the 
calibration curve. E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms showed peaks with MWt 
ranging from 158 to 0.16kDa and 123 to 0.2kDa respectively. C. cerastes venom 
showed seven peaks with MWt ranging from 184 to 0.3kDa and a further five peaks 
with MWt below 0.3kDa. B. arietans venom showed seven peaks with MWt ranging 
from 133 to 0.25kDa. Finally N. h. arabica venom showed six peaks with MWt that 
ranged from 158 to 5kDa. 
3.2.3 Non-reducing SDS-PAGE 
Venoms from Saudi Arabian species produced from 8 to 14 bands on 10% SDS-PAGE 
gels under non-reducing conditions, with molecular weights ranging from 20 to above 
94k-Da (Figure 3.3). Unfortunately many bands of MWt below 23kDa could not be 
visualised. E. pyramidum and C. cerastes venoms showed a similar bands as did the E. 
coloratus and B. arietans venoms. All the venoms had several intense bands with MWt 
of under 30kDa and many less intense bands of MWt from 43 to 94kDa. E. coloratus 
Figure 3.1 RP- HPLC of Saudi Arabian Viper Venom 
mAbs 2S0nm 
E. pyramidum 
C. cerastes 
mAbs 40 
280 nm 
venom 
Rnention 
time (mills) 
I 20.9 14.4 
2 8.5 18. 
3 6.3 19 
4 11 19.5 
3 10.4 20.3 
6 9.4 21.2 
7 IS 22.8 
8 9 23.7 
9 0 26.3 
venom lime lmu 
I 14 4 4.3 
2 2.5 13.3 
3 0.6 17.8 
4 12.9 18.9 
5 15.2 20.3 
6 7.2 21.7 
7 11.5 23.3 
8 24.9 24.2 
9 6.6 30.4 
10 4.2 31.3 
E coloratus P, %. f Re"tion V 
I 11.3 143 
I 10.3 
5 6 I' 
6 Ii1 20 
?I B . 
15 .Ie 
10 175 
v nom 
Retention 
timt (mina) 
72 5.1 
2 0.5 14.4 
3 1.6 17.2 
4 1.4 17.7 
5 0.7 18.7 
6 0.3 19.4 
7 6.7 20.7 
8 8.2 22.2 
9 4.2 24 
10 03 25.3 
11 3.9 274 
0 10 20 30 10 20 30 
Retention time (min) Retention time (min) 
Figure 3.1 shows the profile of Saudi Arabian venoms from E. pyramidum, E. coloratus, C. 
cerastes and B. arielans when analysed by RP HPLC. Approximately 200g from (1 mg/ml) of 
each venom was applied to the column (Supelco RP LC-8-DB, 15cm length, 4.6mm diamter and 
5nm beads), which was equilibrated with 5% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluroacetic acid (TFA) and 
the protein eluted with a gradient of 90% acetonitrile in 0.1 % TFA at flow rate of 0.5m1/min and 
the absorbance read at 280nm. 
Figure 3.2 FPLC Gel Filtration of Venoms from Saudi Arabian Vipers 
106 ]I 24 
3 30 :a2 2e 
18 31 
< 9 9t 
6 25 28 37? 
7 13 2 388 
8 0 16 a2 h 
2 71 ] 7 (B) 
l 41 3a 
e :6 n 
A7 8 244 
A 1 28 
J :0 4 3J 4 
M1 346 
6 22 I4 38 
03 I ' 
e i3 44 
4 I6 46 
10 - 10 L 
02 60 
1 j, 1 
CD CD 00 
p kDa sennm nm Imms) 
/Lj'1 
rD 133 316 =3_' 
33 3< 6 
3 I. t 1.6 ? I. D 
DIa D7 336 
S 3.1 1i 36.6 
6 Lc IA 364 
7 25 23 s 42 
68 19 
78 306 4 
10 30 
, i4 
Retention "lime (min) 
Figure 3.2 shows a profile of 
Saudi Arabian venoms from 
Epyramidum (A), E. coloratus 
(B), Ccerastes (C), B. arietans 
(D) and N. h. arabica (E) when 
analysed by FPLC on a superose 
12 HR 10/30 15cm length and 
10mm diameter column. 
Approximately 200g from 
(I mg/m1) each venom was 
applied to the column 
which was eluted with 154 mM 
NaCl at pH 5.5, flow rate at 
0.5m1/min and the 
absorbance read at 280nm. 
Figure 3.3 SDS-PAGE of Saudi Arabian Venoms 
12345 
Mol. Wt. 
(kDa) 
30 jo 
#4 Oz i, - 
23 G'" 
Venoms from W. aegyptia (2), B. arietans (3), C. cerastes (4), N. h. arabica (5), E. 
pyramidum (6) and Ecoloratus (7) were resolved by SDS-PAGE using 10%, non- 
reducing gels. All venoms produced between 8 to 14 bands with MWt ranging from 20 
to 94 kDa. E. pyramidum and C. cerastes venoms shared many bands as did the E. 
coloratus and B. arietans venom. E. coloratus venom contained the most bands (14) 
including those with the highest and lowest molecular weights. N. h. arabica venom 
lacked many of the bands found in W. aegyptia venom. Lane 1 contained MWt markers. 
venom contained the most bands (14) including those with the highest and lowest 
molecular weights. N. h. arabica venom lacked many of the bands found in W. aegyptia 
venom. 
3.3 ENZYMATIC ACTVITIES 
All methods were described in Chapter II and venom activity is expressed as the amount 
of venom required to produce 50% activity. 
3.3.1 Phospholipase A2 
E. coloratus venom showed the highest PLA2 activity (0.54g), although E. pyramidum 
and N.. h. arabica venoms were only slightly less potent (Ig). Similar activities were 
produced by C. cerastes and B. arietans venoms (4g) (Table 3.1). 
3.3.2 Phosphodiesterase 
About double the activity was found in the venoms from the Echis species (E. 
pyramidum and E. coloratus) than in N. h. arabica, C. cerastes and B. arietans venoms. 
3.3.3 Hyaluronidase 
The venom from E. coloratus and N. h. arabica showed the highest hyaluronidase 
activity followed by those from B. arietans and and C. cerastes venoms while E. 
pyramidum venom showed the least effect. 
3.3.4 L-Amino-Acid Oxidase 
E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms showed the highest activity, 
followed by C. 
cerastes venom while N. h. arabica venom was slightly less potent. The activity of 
arietans venom was the lowest as suggested by its white colour, since this enzyme is the 
cause of the yellow colour of many venoms. 
Table 3.1 Enzymatic Activities of Saudi Arabian Venoms 
Amount of venom (g) required to produce 50% activity 
Species 
PLA2 PDE HYL L-AAO Proteolytic 
L-BAPNA dimethyl casein 
E. pyramidum 1 3 62 7 20 10 
E. coloratus 0.5 3 14 7 20 20 
Ccerastes 
4 6 40 12 8 15 
B. arietans 4 7 30 50 35 35 
N. h. arabica 1 5 20 20 601 601 
Table 3.1 lists the amount of venom (in g) from E. pyramidum, E. coloratus, C. 
cerastes, B. arietans and N h. arabica that was required to produce 50% phospholipase 
A2, phosphodiesterase, hyaluronidase, L-amino acid oxidase and proteolytic activity 
using L-BAPNA and dimethyl casein as substrates. 
maximum was 60% activity. 
3.3.5 Proteolytic Activity 
Proteolytic activity was assessed using dimethyl casein as substrate. Venom from E. 
pyramidum showed the highest activity while N. h. arabica venom had the lowest effect 
using this substrate (100g produced 60% of maximum activity). Findings were similar 
when using L-BAPNA as substrate (Table 3.1). 
3.4 BIOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT 
All methods were performed as described in Chapter II. 
3.4.1 Indirect Haemolysis 
E. coloratus venom showed the highest indirect haemolytic activity with 254g causing 
100% haemolysis (Table 3.2). E. pyramidum, N. h. arabica and A. microlepidota 
venoms showed medium activity (50g) whereas C. cerastes and B. arietans venoms 
were less active (100g). 
3.4.2 Coagulation 
The minimum coagulant dose for human plasma (MCD-P) by venom from Saudi 
Arabian snakes of medical importance is given in Table 3.2. E. coloratus venom was 
more effective (3g) than E. pyramidum venom (4g). Both Echis species had 
negligible action on bovine fibrinogen. The venoms from C. cerastes, B. arietans and N. 
h. arabica had no detectable procoagulant activity using either human plasma or bovine 
fibrinogen and venom amounts up to 1 mg. 
3.4.3 Platelet Aggregation 
Neither of the two Saudi Arabian elapid venoms (N. h. arabica and W. aegyptia) tested 
induced platelet aggregation when added to PRP. Addition of ADP showed complete 
aggregation which indicates that there were no inhibitors present in the two venoms. The 
Table 3.2 Biological Activities of Saudi Arabian Venoms (Maximum Venom 
Activity in g) 
Species Coagulation Indirect 
haemolysis 
Platelet 
aggregation 
Haemorrhage Necrotic Defibrino 
-genation 
E. pyramidum 4 50 - 8 20 7 
E. coloratus 3 25 - 16 20 12 
C. cerastes NA 100 1 - - - 
B. arietans NA * 100 10 - - - 
N. h. arabica NA 50 - - - - 
A. microlepidota - 50 - - - - 
Table 3.3 lists the biological activities recorded as the minimum amount of venom (in g) 
from E. pyramidum, E. coloratus, C. cerastes, B. arietans and N. h. arabica, required to 
produce maximum coagulant, indirect haemolytic, platelet aggregation, haemorrhagic, necrotic 
and defibrinogenating activities. 
NA: no venom activity up to 1 mg, 
-: not tested and 
*: 30% activity only 
viperid venoms tested initiated platelet aggregation, although to very different degrees 
(Figure 3.4). Just 1g of C. cerastes venom was sufficent whereas it required a higher 
amount of B. arietans venom (]Ogg). It was not possible to study the effects of the 
venom from Echis species as they caused coagulation. 
3.4.4 Neurotoxicity and Myotoxicity 
The neurotoxic and myotoxic activities of N. h. arabica venom were studied using the 
mouse phrenic nerve hemidiaphragm preparation. The venom progressively depressed 
and finally abolished muscle contractions caused by indirect stimulation, while the 
response to direct stimulation was not affected as compared to the control. Venom at 
concentrations of 5.0 and 2.5mg/l produced complete inhibition in 20 2 and 100 8 
minutes respectively, while a concentration of 1.25mg/1 took 180  14 minutes (Figure 
3.5). To determine if this effect was dose dependent, the time taken to reach 80% 
paralysis was measured at three different concentrations (1.25,2.5 and 5mg/1) and 
values of 35,20 and 10 minutes respectively were found (Figure 3.6). The muscle did 
not recover after repeated washing every 30 minutes with Krebs' solution. 
3.4.5 Haemorrhagic Activitiy 
E. pyramidum venom showed higher haemorrhagic activity than E. coloratus venom 
(Figure 3.7). 
3.4.6 Necrotic Activity 
Both E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms showed similar necrotic activity producing 
z a5 mm lesion on the dorsal skin of rats (Figure 3.8). 
Figure 3.4 Effect of C. cerastes Venom on Aggregation of Human Platelets. 
Negative control ADP 1041 Venom I xg r 
_ -- 
, , a- } 'Y5 i 
Time, minutes 
Figure 3.4 shows the aggregating effect of venom from C. cerastes on platelet-rich 
plasma (PRP). Initially base-lines were set using PRP (10% light transmission) and 
platelet-poor plasma (90% light transmission), using a chart speed of 2cm/min. The 
aggregometer measures light transmission at 600nm which increases as platelets 
aggregate. Platelet aggregation was initiated with ADP (I) or with 1g C. cerastes 
venom (II). 
Figure 3.5 Neurotoxicity and Myotoxicity of N. h. arabica Venom (Using The Mouse 
Phrenic Nerve Hemidiaphragm) 
ae 20 
wash Time, minutes 
A mouse hemi-diaphragm preparation was incubated with 1.25 ( ), 2.5 (*) or 5 (A)mg/l of N 
h. arabica venom for 30min. No change in muscle contraction recorded after direct (muscle) 
stimulation (solid lines), whereas a marked change in muscle contraction was recorded after 
indirect (nerve) stimulation (dashed lines). Results are expressed as the mean  SEM of four 
preparations. Control (0). Preparation was washed every 30 min. 
0 435 100 150 200 250 
Figure 3.6 Dose Response Curve for Venom of N. h. arabica Using Indirect (Nerve) 
Stimulation 
>. 40 
0 -f--- 
0 1.25 2.5 5 
Venom Concentration, mg/L 
Figure 3.6 shows the dose dependent, neurotoxic activity of N. h. arabica venom. 1.25,2.5 and 
5mg/l caused 80% of total paralysis after 35,25 and 10 minutes respectively. 
Figure 3.7 Haemorrhagic Activity of Epyramidunr, (a) and E. coloratus(b) Venoms 
Figure 3.7 shows the haemorrhagic lesions produced when 40g (A), 20g (B), IOgg 
(C), 5g (D), 2.54g (E) and 1.25g (F) of E. pyramidum (a) and E. coloratus (b) 
venoms were injected into the dorsal skin of rats. After 24 hours the animals were killed, 
the skin removed, and the diameter of the lesions measured on the inner surface of the 
skin, in two directions at right angles, using calipers and background illumination. The 
mean diameter of the haemorrhagic lesion was calculated for each venom dose and the 
MHD estimated by plotting the mean diameter against dose and reading off the dose 
corresponding to a 10mm lesion. 
Figure 3.8 Necrotic Activity of E. pyramidum (a) and 
E. coloratus (b) Venoms 
Figure 3.8 shows the necrotic lesions produced when different concentrations of E. 
pyramidum (a) and E. coloratus (b) venoms 40g (A), 20g(B), 10g (C), 5g (D), 
2.5g (E) and 1.25g (F) were injected into the dorsal skin of rats. After three days the 
animals were killed, the dorsal skin removed, and the diameter of the lesions measured 
on the inner surface of the skin, in two directions at right angles, using calipers and 
background illumination. The mean diameter of the necrotic lesion was calculated for 
each venom dose and the MND estimated by plotting the mean lesion diameter against 
dose and reading off the dose corresponding to a 5mm lesion. 
3.4.7 Defibrinogenating Activity 
The minimum defibrinogenating dose (MDD) of venom from Echis species that 
produced non-clotting blood within 60 minutes of intravenous injection in mice are 
given in Table 3.2. E. pyramidum venom showed higher activity than E. coloratus 
venom (7g and 12g respectively). 
3.4.8 Lethality 
Very small amounts of two venoms were required for the intravenous LD50 in mice; A. 
microlepidota (0.2g/g) and N. h. arabica (0.3g/g) (Table 3.3). Slightly more venom 
was required for C. cerastes (0.6g/g) and about twice again for B. arietans (1.05gig), 
E. coloratus (1.1 g/g) and E. pyramidum (1.4g/g) venom. 
3.5 DISCUSSION 
Of the Saudi Arabian venoms tested, those from A. microlepidota and N. h. arabica 
were the most lethal. A. microlepidota had a low milking yield and several of the snakes 
did not survive long in captivity. N. h. arabica venom was slightly less toxic but this 
snake may inject a large amount of venom, so that death may occur 
in a few minutes. 
The lethality of E. coloratus and B. arietans venoms agreed with published values 
(Theakston and Reid, 1983) and they were less toxic weight 
for weight than the two 
elapid venoms. 
PLA2 enzymes are major constituents of snake venoms. In this study all the venoms 
tested contained PLA2 with E. coloratus, E. pyramidum and 
N. h. arabica venoms 
showing the highest activity. PLA2 can cause disruption of lipid membranes in vivo and, 
in vitro, the lysolecithin formed may cause further damage, such as lysis of erythrocytes. 
However, haemolysis does not occur in vivo as lysolecithin is bound 
by albumin. As 
there were no direct haemolytic factors, indirect haemolytic activity should correspond 
with PLA2 activity. Snake venom PLA, show a wide variety of toxicities and 
induce 
Table 3.3 Lethal Toxicity (iv LD50) of Venoms from Saudi Arabian Snakes 
Species LDso (g venom /g) 95% Confidence limit/ 20g 
Epyramidum 1.4 24-33 
E. coloratus 1.1 18-29 
C. cerastes 0.6 8-17 
B. arietans 1.05 14-26 
N. h. arabica 0.3 3-9 
A. microlepidota 0.2 3-5 
Table 3.3 lists the lethal dose (ivLD50) of venom from E. pyramidum, E. coloratus, C. 
cerastes, B. arietans, N. h. arabica and A. microlepidota. Mice received increasing 
doses of venom dissolved in saline (total volume 2001) via the tail vein. Five groups of 
five male TFW mice (18-20g) were used and the survivors in each group were counted 
after 24hr. The doses were adjusted so the highest dose gave 100% mortality while all 
the mice survived at the lowest dose. The analysis of the slope of the dose-response 
regressions for the LD50 was performed by the probit method. 
several pathological symptoms (Kini and Evans, 1989). Most venoms contain different 
PLA2 and the basic PLA2 are thought to cause more biological damage such as 
myonecrosis and increased capillary permeability as compared to their acidic 
counterparts (Rosenberg, 1979). 
Hyaluronidases or "spreading factors" specifically depolymerise hyaluronic acid and, 
thereby, dissolve the gel surrounding normal cells and facilitate the diffusion of other 
venom components through the tissues (Boquet et al., 1968). Their action is also 
associated with the oedema and swelling that may be observed at the bite site. Elapids 
generally exhibit low hyaluronidase activity but this was not the situation in the present 
study in which N. h. arabica venom showed considerable activity. Most viperid species 
exhibit moderate to high hyaluronidase activity (Tan and Ponndurai, 1990) and, in the 
present study, E. pyramidum venom showed the lowest hyaluronidase activity. As might 
be expected, oedema is the most common clinical symptom following moderate or 
severe envenoming by this snake. 
L-AAO is generally thought to be of low toxicity but may contribute to the local tissue 
damage caused by venoms. Characteristic of L-AAO is that it colours venom yellow, 
which gradually disappears from lyophilized venom. Some have speculated that this loss 
of colour is due to a reversible limited conformational change, whereas Ueda (1988) 
reported that the L-AAO isolated from Trimeresurus mucrosquamatus venom was 
irreversably inactivated by lyophilisation and freezing. E. pyramidum and E. coloratus 
venoms were both deeply yellow and also had the highest L-AAO activity. Yan and 
colleagues (1994) reported that L-AAO also induces platelet aggregation. 
Snake venoms, especially those from Viperidae, contain many proteolytic enzymes 
(Kocholaty et al., 1971; Seegers and Ouyang, 1979) causing coagulation, haemorrhage, 
necrosis and fibrinogenolysis (Tu et al., 1969). Venom proteases have different enzyme 
activities on different substrates. Most of the venoms tested in the present study 
hydrolysed dimethyl casein and L-BAPNA. 
Coagulation disorders and haemorrhage are among the most prominent features of bites 
of vipers (Jimenez-Porras, 1970). Many snake venoms contain factors which either 
promote or inhibit blood coagulation. Thus blood coagulation can be affected by venom 
proteins which are enzymes (proteases or PLAZ) and, in some cases, by non-enzymatic 
proteins (Ouyang and Teng, 1972; Teng and Seegers, 1981). Venom PLA2s act as 
anticoagulants by inactivating the procoagulant activity of the phospholipids which 
provide an activating surface for blood clotting factors (Ouyang et al., 1978), while 
proteases cause cleavage of clotting factors which leads to acceleration or retardation of 
coagulation. The venom of all species of Echis causes hemostatic failure through the 
combined effect of its procoagulant, fibrinolytic, antiplatelet and haemorrhagic 
components (Cheymol et al., 1973). In the present study both Saudi Arabian Echis 
species produced considerable coagulant activity. Echis species venoms contain a 
protein that initiates intravascular coagulation by direct activation of prothrombin 
(Weiss et al., 1973; Kornalik and Blombak, 1975). In this study there was no coagulant 
activity by Saudi Arabian C. cerastes venom, however Abdulla and associates (1992) 
reported that this venom showed activity at low concentrations and had anticoagulant 
effects at higher concentrations. Labib and his colleagues (1981) also found that venom 
from C. cerastes snakes disturb the coagulation mechanism. 
Clinical effects of puff-adder venom on whole blood, plasma and serum include a 
decreased platelet count (Takahashi and Tu, 1970) and prolonged prothrombin time 
(Philips et al., 1973). B. arietans venom has been reported to have either coagulant or 
anticoagulant properties (Visser and Chapman, 1978) while, in this study, the venom did 
not show any coagulant activity. 
Snake venoms affect platelets in various ways. For example, some venoms induce while 
others inhibit platelet aggregation and both these activities may exist in the same venom. 
During such agreggation, nucleotides, serotonin and other platelet factors or constituents 
may be released. Two of the mechanisms by which a venom intiates platelet aggregation 
are (1) to affect directly the platelet membrane or (2) to affect the platelets indirectly 
through the release of platelet constituents (especially ADP) (Seegers and Ouyang, 
1979). Both C. cerastes and B. arietans venoms showed a dose-dependent initiation of 
platlet aggregation. Two fractions isolated from B. arietans venom (bitistatin and arietin) 
inhibited platelet agreggation through interference with fibrinogen binding to fibrinogen 
receptors on platelet surfaces (Shebuski et al., 1989; Huang et al., 1991). Farid and his 
colleagues (1990) isolated cerastobin (a thrombin-like enzyme) from C. cerastes venom 
that initiated platelet agreggation. Shebuski and associates (1990) reported that 
echistatin, a fraction isolated from E. pyramidum venom, is an effective antithrombotic 
agent which inhibits both platelet aggregation in vivo in the coronary artery as well as ex 
vivo with a concomitant increase in the bleeding time. Huang and colleagues (1991) 
isolated a fraction from Agkistrodon halys venom (halysin) which has a similar 
inhibitory effect as echistatin on platelets. 
Enhancement of platelet aggregation can be replicated by L-AAO or peroxide and 
inhibited by catalase and it has been suggested that venom impairs platelet aggregation 
by generating hydrogen peroxide (Nathan et al., 1982). 
General haemorrhage is one of the characteristic symptoms associated with 
envenomation by snakes from the family Viperidae and especially Echis species, as 
shown in the present study. This has been ascribed to the presence of metalloproteinases 
known as haemorrhagins. Haemorrhage associated with intravascular coagulation is also 
a prominent feature of E. coloratus envenomation (Rechnic et al., 1962). 
All the Echis venoms possessed the ability to cause local necrosis when introduced 
intradermally. The MDD of both Echis species were less than their LD50 and the value 
agreed with those of Theakston and Reid (1983). Certain snake venoms with direct 
prothrombin converting enzymes can cause defibrination in vivo and include those 
derived from E. coloratus (Gitter et al., 1960) and E. pyramidum (Kornalik and Pudlak, 
1971). 
The decrease in muscle contraction observed with N. h. arabica venom, using the mouse 
hemi-diaphragm preparation, could either be due to venom component(s) blocking nerve 
conduction or direct effects on the muscle. The fact that direct stimulation was not 
affected, indicated the presence of a component that affects the nerve. Neurotoxic affects 
have been described for cobra venoms, while the neurotoxic properties of N. h. arabica 
venom are less well established. 
CHAPTER IV 
ASSESSMENT OF OVINE ANTIVENOMS FOR TREATING 
ENVENOMATION BY SAUDI ARABIAN VENOMOUS SNAKES 
4.1 SUMMARY 
Antivenoms were raised in individual groups of sheep against venom from E. 
pyramidum, E. coloratus, C. cerastes, B. arietans and N. h. arabica. To optimise the 
antibody response, groups of three sheep were immunised with increasing venom 
amounts and the monthly serum samples were assessed by ELISA and small scale 
affinity purification. After doubling the immunisation dose, there was a marked 
increase in ELISA titres and specific antibody concentrations. When the humoral 
response had been optimised, IgG fractions were prepared and digested with papain to 
form Fab fragments. Purity of the ovine IgG and its Fab fragment was at least 95%. 
Western blotting showed that antibody populations bound most of the venom 
components. 
The Fab antivenoms neutralised the enzymatic and biological effects and protected 
mice against the lethal effects of the above venoms. ED50 values were in the order: E. 
pyramidum (11 g/g) < E. coloratus (13g/g) < B. arietans (30g/g) < C. cerastes (60g/g) < 
N. h. arabica (143g Fab/g venom). Various methods were used to assess cross- 
neutralisation of closely related venoms and the highest cross-reactivity was obtained 
with E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms. 
A. microlepidota was not included in this study because of low milking yield of venom. 
4.2 PRODUCTION OF OVINE ANTIVENOMS 
4.2.1 Immunisation and Bleeding 
Groups of three sheep were immunised with different doses of each venom. The venom 
was dissolved in saline (1.3m1/sheep), sterile filtered, and mixed with Brij 35 
(0.2m1/sheep) and adjuvant (3.25ml/sheep) to form a stable water-in-oil emulsion. 
Freund's complete adjuvant was used for the primary immunisation, and Freund's 
incomplete adjuvant for all subsequent re-immunisations. Half-Breed Welsh ewes were 
immunised at six sites: intramuscularly in the forelimbs and hindlimbs and in two 
subcutaneous sites on either side of the neck. The sheep were immunised at monthly 
intervals and aseptically bled (500ml) or sampled (5ml) via the jugular vein two weeks 
after each immunisation. The blood samples were rolled slowly for 2hr at room 
temperature to enhance clotting, centrifuged at 4500g and the serum aspirated and stored 
frozen until used. 
4.2.2 Optimisation of Immunisation Dose 
For primary immunisation, groups of sheep were injected with 0.5mg of C. cerastes, B. 
arietans or N. h. arabica venom. Three sheep in each group (the low dose group) were 
continued at 0.5mg of venom monthly while the dose was doubled in the remainder 
every month until a maximum of 2 or 4mg was being injected in the medium and high 
dose group respectively (Table 4.1). Serum samples from individual sheep were assessed 
by ELISA and small scale affinity chromatography as described in Chapter II. The data 
for sheep immunised with E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms are described in 
Chapter V. 
4.2.2.1 Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay 
The antibody levels rose rapidly and by 22 weeks after the primary immunisation, 
most sheep had achieved a maximum response (Figure 4.1). The three sheep 
immunised with only the low dose of N. h. arabica venom (0.5mg) achieved relatively 
the lowest titres (average 0.8x106) and increasing the dose to 2mg doubled the 
response, with average ELISA titres of 1.5x106 for sheep S5 and S6, although sheep 
S4 showed a lower response. The maximum antibody response 
for N. h. arabica 
venom was achieved using the high venom dose (4mg), with titres averaging 2.4x 106 
throughout the initial 70 week study period. 
Table 4.1 Immunisation and Sampling Schedule 
Immunogen Dose (mg) 
Week No. High dose 
(sheep 1-3) 
Medium dose 
(sheep 4-6) 
Low dose 
(sheep7-9) 
Sample/Bleed 
0 0.5 0.5 0.5 
4 1 1 0.5 
6 Sample 
8 2 2 0.5 
10 Sample 
12 4 2 0.5 
14 Sample 
16 4 2 0.5 
18 Sample 
20 4 2 0.5 
From 70 weeks 
72 4 4 1 
74 Bleed 
76 4 4 2 
78 Bleed 
80 4 4 4 
Groups of three sheep were immunised with different doses of each venom. For primary 
immunisation, sheep were injected with 0.5mg of C. cerastes, B. arietans or N. h. arabica 
venom in Freund's complete adjuvant; all furthers immunisations were in Freund's incomplete 
adjuvant. The low dose groups continued to receive 0.5mg of venom monthly while the dose 
was doubled in the remaining sheep every month to a maximum of 2 and 4mg for the medium 
and high dose groups respectively. At week 72 immunising dose for sheep in the low and 
medium dose groups were doubled each month to a maximum of 4mg. 
/ \ po N 
 o 000000 
oLx auiu rsna 
N 41 V1 
i% O 
Cr E - 
V l _ 
Z ; O 
o Cn  
00000 
00000 
oon NN 
iOLX 3VIII VS113 
Q Noy 
,^ Vl 
L \ \ Z \ 
1.1.11 
 0 000 
, OLX 31L. LLL YSn3 
(mO \a 
OO ONQN 
Oif NN^^ 
, ox aaiu VSIl3 
I/ d2 
\ s 
E_ \\ N 
OOO0 
nnNr 
plY llwi vsn] 
OO ppOO 
pONON 
, oIx Bolo 
YS113 
N O =' 
1  y 
1 O NH 
  N o Gv 
 r N On =N 
, GLX 3VILL 
VS113 
V.. L 
NN v 
'v y  .n 
1 O aU 
\\ O w 
O "" RS 
NN" N V1 'y 
, OIX 3HIU VS113 r- 1- to 
OO O O 
NN  
, oil 3" Vsm Cz U 
The dose responses against B. arietans and C. cerastes venoms were, in general, 
similar to the response to N. h. arabica venom. As the dose was doubled titres also 
increased and the highest response was found using 4mg venom. ELISA titres in the 
highest dose group immunised with N. h. arabica and B. arietans venoms were higher 
than those from sheep immunised with C. cerastes venom (Figure 4.2). 
After 70 weeks the immunisation dose was increased to 4mg for all the sheep 
including these in the low and medium dose groups and the antisera were then pooled 
for each group of nine sheep. There was no further marked increase in ELISA titres 
with their average values being in the order N. h. arabica 1.6x 106 = B. arietans 
1.6x 106 > C. cerastes 1.3x 106. 
4.2.2.2 Small Scale Affinity Chromatography 
N. h. arabica, B. arietans and C. cerastes venoms coupled to Sepharose 4B were 
incubated with a serum sample (0.5ml) and the specific antibody concentration 
determined as described in Chapter II. 
Specific immunoglobulin values in the antivenoms raised against N. h. arabica venom 
ranged from 6 to 16g/l throughout the initial 70 weeks of study with the concentrations 
the groups receiving the two largest doses being higher than 
in those receiving the 
lowest venom dose (Figure 4.3). This is in accord with the ELISA 
findings. The specific 
antibody concentrations in the three groups immunised with 
B. arietans venom showed 
similar levels ranging from about 6 to 11 g/1. 
The specific immunoglobulin concentrations in the sera of sheep 
immunised with C. 
Gerastes venom were slightly higher and ranged from 9 to I4g/l. 
Individual sheep showed 
some variance but the responses assessed using specific antibody 
levels were more 
homogeneous than that measured by ELISA. In general, the specific antibody 
concentrations increased with dose of immunogen (Figure 
4.2) but levels were similar 
in the sheep immunised with medium and high doses of N. 
h, arabica venom. 
Figure 4.2 Titres and Specific Antibody Concentrations of Antivenom Produced 
by Sheep Immunised with Low, Medium and High Dose of Venom 
L Low dose 0.5mg 
M Medium dose 1mg 
H High dose 4mg 
300 15 
t' 100 
Antibody titres (assessed by ELISA) and specific antibody concentrations (assessed by 
small scale affinity chromatography) of antiserum obtained from sheep immunised 
with low, medium and high doses of B. arietans, C. cerastes and N. h. arabica 
venoms were compared. In all cases both titres and specific antibody concentrations 
increased with dose. Values are expressed as the mean of three sheep. 
LMHLMHLMH 
Immunisation dose 
Z p  
 W O 
" O  
N pm mfNO 
1 0 'uO Uil I. G3 
NOYI N N 
CS'  " z 
"  R 1 " 
1  N C o` 1 e + V] E `  
--- -------- 
yL .rN o n f o 
C " ' Ihn up u u 
1' 0 6 
tl fNO Ob" NO 
,py 04 0C (G f 
U6 'uopuwwo 
oNm .odNo 
1/E QUO luluawoo 
N 00N O 
tl fNOo tl fNO 
UEualiluauoO 
1/6 Ne4wauo3 
vii `"' 
Y +--C 
2 " W) cu 
m NOm0O 
1/6 'uOp1AUOauOD 
to r- 
tl + CZ 
.. \ i lh 
ii5++ 
4' 1 0 CS 
yW1  
O 1 3 }. 
U  m 
 ^^OOOf 
I/O yopulu. auop ,,, 
4.3 PREPARATION OF IMMUNOGLOBULIN AND Fab FRACTIONS 
Bleeds taken 32 weeks after primary immunisation from groups of three sheep 
immunised with E. pyramidum or E. coloratus venoms were pooled, filtered and the 
immunoglobulin fraction purified by salt precipitation as described in Chapter II. The 
total protein concentration of the serum pools varied from 59 to 65g/l and, of this, about 
40% was removed in the supernatant and about 60% remained in the immunoglobulin 
fraction (Table 4.2). SDS-PAGE showed that salt precipitation removed most of the 
albumin, while most of the immunoglobulins remained in the precipitated fraction 
(Figure 4.4) and losses of IgG were negligible. Two fractions were obtained when the 
IgG fraction was run using FPLC (Figure 4.5). The first peak comprising only 6% of the 
applied protein, had a retention time of 16min and a MWt of about 747kDa. This 
fraction is probably aggregated IgG. The second peak had a MWt of 143kDa, a retention 
time of 23min and represented 94% of applied protein. ELISA titres of the serum and 
immunoglobulin fractions were similar. 
Immunoglobulin fractions (500m1) at concentrations of 35 and 38g/1, were then cleaved 
with papain (final concentration 16% w/w of the total IgG) at rt (Table 4.2). To optimise 
the time of digestion, the immunoglobulin fraction was mixed with papain and aliquots 
were removed at regular intervals and analysed by immunoelectrophoresis as described 
in Chapter II. After one hour of digestion, Fe and Fab bands had appeared as 
precipitating arcs together with intact IgG (Figure 4.6). The Fc concentration increased 
to a maximum level after 5hr and then, with further digestion, the Fc precipitate arc 
disappeared. All IgG had disappeared completely after 47 hr when only Fab was present. 
The yield of Fab varied from 78 to 83% (Table 4.2) and SDS-PAGE showed that the 
immunoglobulins, and many other components present in smaller quantities in the IgG 
fraction, had disappeared after papain digestion leaving only one dominant band (Figure 
4.4). Two fractions were obtained when subjecting the Fab fraction to FPLC but the first 
was an extremely small peak with a retention time of 24.7mins. It had a MWt of about 
89kDa and this fraction may be dimeric Fab. The second peak had a MWt of 45kDa, a 
retention time of 27.4min and represented 98% of the total (Figure 4.5). 
Table 4.2 Preparation of Immunoglobulin and Fab Fractions for Two Antivenoms 
IgG PRECIPITATION 
E. pyramidum antivenom E. coloralus antivenom 
Volume, ml 500 500 
Serum pool Protein, g/1 59 62 
Specific antibody, g/I 13 14 
ELISA antibody titre 875,000 895,000 
Volume, ml 580 550 
IgG fraction Protein, g/1 35 38 
Specific antibody, g/I 11 12 
ELISA antibody titre 750,000 820,000 
Albumin, mg/I 1.2 5 
PAPAIN DIGESTION: 
Volume, ml 630 580 
Fab fraction Protein, g/l 22 24 
Specific antibody, g/l 7 8 
ELISA antibody titre 128,000 124,000 
Albumin, mg/l 0.008 0.008 
E. pyramidum and E. coloratus antivenoms were subjected to salt fractionation and 
papain digestion. At each stage of processing total protein concentrations (g/1), specific 
antibody concentrations (g/l), ELISA titres and albumin concentrations were estimated, 
the latter by fluoroimmunoassay. 
Figure 4.4 SDS-PAGE of Papain Digestion 
67kDa 
43kda 
23kDa 
.. - -`_ 
J111'; 
Antisera raised against the venoms from E. pyramidum and 
E. coloratus were resolved 
using 10%, non reducing SDS-PAGE. 
Serum (lanes 1 and 2) showed two major 
bands 
corresponding to IgG and albumin, whereas after salt 
precipitation only the IgG band 
remained visable (lanes 4 and 5). After papain 
digestion one major protein was present 
(lanes 6 and 7). 
Figure 4.5 FPLC of Ovine IgG and Fab Antivenom 
(A) IgG 
Peak MWt % of total retention 
no. kDa protein time (min) 
1 747 6 ]6.5 
2 143 94 22.8 
(B) Fab 
Peak MWt % of total retention 
no. kDa protein time (min) 
1 89 2 24.7 
2 45 98 27.4 
200g of ovine IgG (A) and Fab (B) antwenom 
raised against venom from E. pyramidum were 
analysed by FPLC on Superose 12 HR column. 
Proteins were eluted with 154 mM NaCl at pH 
0 00 N 
Retention Time (min) 
0 20 40 
Retention Time (min) 
Figure 4.6 ; Immunelectrophoresis of Samples from Papain Digestion of Antiserum 
Samples taken during the papain digestion of antivenom were assessed by 
immunoelectrophoresis. After one hour of digestion, Fc and Fab bands appeared as 
precipitating arcs together with intact IgG. The Fc concentration increased to a 
maximum level after 5hrs and then disappeared with further digestion. All IgG had 
disappeared completely after 21 hrs. {Lane 1 before digestion, lane 2 after l hr of 
digestion, lane 3 after 5hr of digestion, lane 4 after 21hr of digestion, lane 5 after 23hr of 
digestion, lane 6 after 29hr digestion, lane 7 after 47hr digestion, lane 8 after 91hr 
digestion, lane 9 after 24hr digestion and 48hr of dialysis, lane 10 Reference (IgG +Fab + 
Fc)}. 
Albumin concentrations were measured by a specific fluoroimmunoassay as described in 
Chapter II. The two immunoglobulin precipitates had albumin concentrations of 1.2 and 
5mg/l respectively which were reduced after digestion with papain to values of only 
0.008 mg/l. 
The ELISA antibody titre of the Fab fractions appeared to fall markedly compared to the 
IgG fractions with apparent losses of 81% to 89% (Table 4.2). However, this is an 
artifact since detection of the antibodies and antibody fragments bound to venom, 
depends, in the assay used, on the binding of a second antiserum raised against intact 
ovine IgG. Clearly this will contain many more antibody populations directed against 
intact IgG (with its retained Fc component) than against Fab and this largely explains the 
lower apparent titres. 
4.4 NEUTRALISATION OF ENZYMATIC ACTIVITIES 
Neutralisation of enzymatic activities was assessed as described in Chapter II and the 
result expressed as the amount of antivenom (g) required per g venom to produce 
maximum neutralisation. 
The specific Fab antivenoms completely neutralised the PLA2 activity of their 
respective venoms (Figure 4.7) with the C. cerastes and B. arietans antivenoms 
being 
the most effective (Table 4.3). The Fab fraction of all five ovine antivenoms also 
completely neutralised the phosphodiesterase activity of all venoms and again the 
cerastes and B. arietans antivenoms were the best. The Fab 
fractions were particularly 
effective in completely neutralising the hyaluronidase activity of venoms 
from the five 
Saudi Arabian venomous snakes, requiring only from 10 to 
20g per g of venom and the 
C. cerastes and B. arietans antivenoms were, in this instance, no 
better then the other 
three products. 
Figure 4.7 Neutralisation of Phospholipase A2 Activity Using Ovine Fab 
Antivenom 
CO 60 
Amount of antivenom, mg 
Figure 4.7 shows the efficacy of monospecific ovine Fab in protecting against the 
phospholipase A2 activity of venoms from E. pyramidum (U), E. coloratus (A), N. h. 
arabica (0), C. cerastes (") and B. arietans (0). The % neutralisation was measured 
using the substrate phosphatidytcholine and is expressed as the increase in OD at 400nm. 
Normal sheep serum (0). 
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 
Table 4.3 The Efficacy of Monospecific Ovine Fab in the Inhibition of Venom 
Enzymatic Activities. 
Antivenom raised 
against venom from 
Phospholipase A2 Phosphodiesterase Hyaluronidase 
E. pyramidum 500 320 10 
E. coloratus 1000 320 13 
C. cerastes 125 80 20 
B. arietans 125 160 13 
N. h. arabica 500 320 20 
The efficacy of monospecific ovine Fab fractions in inhibition the phospholipase A2, 
phosphodiesterase and hyaluronidase activities of E. pyramidum, E. coloratus, C. cerastes, B. 
arietans and N. h. arabica venoms was assessed. Values are expressed in terms of g 
antivenoml g venom. 
4.5 NEUTRALISATION OF BIOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES 
Neutralisation of biological activities was measured as described in Chapter II. 
4.5.1 Indirect Haemolytic Activity 
The Fab fraction completely neutralised the indirect haemolytic activity of E. 
pyramidum, E. coloratus and C. cerastes venoms with the antivenom directed against 
the latter being the most effective (Table 4.4). However, the monospecific antivenom 
raised against N. h. arabica venom neutralised only 90% of the indirect haemolytic 
activity. The IgG fraction from normal sheep serum showed no inhibition of indirect 
haemolytic activity. 
4.5.2 Coagulant Activity 
Ovine Fab raised against E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venom provided excellent 
protection against the coagulant activity of the respective venoms using 125 and 1674g 
antivenom respectively (Table 4.4) 
4.5.3 Platelet Aggregation 
The highest amount of the antivenom raised against C. cerastes venom (2504g) 
completely inhibited initiation of platelet aggregation by the venom (Figure 4.8). 
However, lower amounts (125 and 62g) showed inhibition of the ADP induced 
initiation. A small amount (50g) of the antivenom raised against B. arietans venom 
also completely inhibited platelet initiation whereas the IgG fraction obtained from 
normal sheep serum showed no effect. 
4.5.4 Haemorrhagic Activity 
The ovine antivenoms raised against E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms both 
provided excellent protection against the haemorrhagic lesion induced by the two 
venoms (Figure 4.9). However the minimum neutralising dose of specific ovine Fab 
against E. coloratus venom (8g/g) was lower than for the E. pyramidum antivenom 
(16g/g)" 
Table 4.4 The Efficacy of Monospecific Ovine Fab Fractions in the Inhibition of 
Venom Biological Activities 
Antivenom 
raised 
against: 
Indirect 
haemolysis 
Coagulation Initiation of Haemorrhage 
platelet 
aggregation 
Necrosis Defibrinogenation 
E. pyramidum 100 125 - 16 3 143 
E. coloratus 200 167 -8 6 83 
C. cerastes 50 NA 250 - -- 
B. arietans NA NA 50 - - 
N. h. arabfca 100* NA NA - -- 
The efficacy of monospecific ovine Fab fractions in inhibiting coagulant, indirect haemolytic, 
platelet aggregating, haemorrhagic, necrotic and defibrinogenating activities of venom from E. 
pyramidum, E. coloratus, C. cerastes, B. arietans and N. h. arabica. Values are expressed in terms 
of g antivenom/g venom. 
-: Not tested, *: Maximum inhibition 90% and NA: No venom activity 
F iturr 4.8 NruIrali. ing i- (licar% of O Inr 1" ah against Inhiatlon of Ills tckt '1kgrcgatlcn In 
Ccrrasre% 'chum 
+ i  _--- " 
 ... .. d 
I imr, nflnufri 
Iia ('ccraifc, vcntmi (i) wp cmtxcd with 2O41 (n) 12tIjj (III) cu (2 iij (iv) ovtnc 
1 a1, foIlmo d h} Al )1' and the ckijmr of inhihituon of platelet a ur jtmant mca u d. 
uamg hlatclct"nch pIatmu+ (PKP An a"tcitomctct wau used to mcautr the aclnUy by 
light tronxtirision at 6(khun 
Figure 4.9 Neutralising Efficacy of Specific Ovine Fab Against Haemorrhagic 
Activity of E. cariatus (a) and E. coloratus (b) Venoms 
Figure 4.9 shows neutralisation of the haemorrhagic activity caused by 8g E. 
pyramidum venom (a) and 16g E. coloratus venom (b) by premixing with antivenoms 
(A 2000g, B 1000g, C 500g, D250g, E 125g). Venom (F) and venom/antivenom 
mixes were injected into the dorsal skin of rats. After 24 hours the animals were killed, 
the dorsal skin removed, and the diameter of the lesions measured on the inner surface 
of the skin. Haemorrhagic activity was neutralised at all antivenom concentrations as 
evidenced by the absence of lesions. 
4.5.5 Necrotic Activity 
Both monospecific ovine antivenoms raised against E. pyramidum and E. coloratus 
venoms showed a marked protection against the necrotic lesion of these venoms (Figure 
4.10). Again the minimum neutralising dose of monospecific ovine Fab raised against E. 
pyramidum venom was lower than that raised against E. coloratus venom (3 and 12g/g 
respectively). 
4.5.6 Defibrinogenating Activity 
Both ovine antivenoms raised against E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms provided 
a marked protection against the defibrinogenating effect of the their respective venoms 
(Table 4.4) with the minimum neutralising dose of antivenom raised against E. coloratus 
being slightly lower (83g/g) than that raised against E. pyramidum venom (143g/g). 
4.5.7 Lethal Toxicity 
The ED50 of the ovine Fab fractions indicated that the more lethal the venom, the more 
antivenom was required to protect the mice (Table 4.5). Expressed as the amount of 
specific Fab required for 50% protection (g Fab/g venom) the protection produced was 
in the order: E. pyramidum (11 g/g) < E. coloratus (13g/g) < B. arietans (30g/g) < C. 
cerastes (60g/g) < N. h. arabica (143 g/g). 
4.6 CROSS-NEUTRALISATION STUDIES 
Cross-neutralisation was assessed using Western blotting, ELISA and small scale 
affinity chromatography as described in Chapter II. 
4.6.1 Western Blotting 
Antibody populations in each of the five antivenoms bound most of the venom 
components in the venoms used for immunisation. The antivenom raised against 
pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms showed more than eight bands on Western blotting 
(Figure 4.11). C. cerastes venom showed nine bands and B. arietans venom eight bands. 
Figure 4.10 Neutralising Efficacy of Specific Ovine Fab Against Necrotic Activity of 
E. carinatus (a) and E. coloratus (b) Venoms 
Figure 4.10 shows neutralisation of 
the necrosis caused 
by 20g E. pyramidum venom 
and 20g E. coloratus 
venom (b) when pre-mixed 
with antivenoms 
(A 500g, B 
C D62gE 31g)Venom 
(F) and venom/antivenom 
mixes were 
injected 
into o the e dorsal skin of rats. 
After 72 
urthe 
animals were 
on the inner surfaced 
of the 
d skin. 
skin removed, and 
the diameter of the 
lesions meas 
and above. 
Lesions were absent at concentrations 
of Fab of 125 g 
Table 4.5 Murine ED50 of Ovine Fab Antivenoms Tested Against the Venom 
Used for their Production. 
Antivenom g Fab/mouse gFab/g (mouse) g Fab/g venom 
E. pyramidum 1500 (1000-2000)" 75 11 
E. coloratus 1400 (900-2600) 70 13 
C. cerastes 3600 (3000-4000) 180 60 
B. arietans 3200 (2600-3700) 160 30 
N. h. arabica 4300 (4000-4700) 215 143 
The effective dose of monospecific ovine Fab required to protect 50% of mice 
against five times the lethal dose (ivLD50) of venom from E. pyramidum, E. 
coloratus, C. cerastes, B. arietans, N. h. arabica and A. microlepidota was 
assessed. Mice received increasing doses of antivenom and the number of 
survivors in each group were counted after 24hr. The analysis of the slope of the 
dose-response for the ED50 was performed by the probit method. 
* 95% confidence limits 
Figure 4.11 Western Blotting 
A, B C, D and E 
Lanc No. Venom 
I E. pl'r'amidlml 
2 E. (Y /01-allLC 
3 E. n<c llutrrs 
4 C. cerastes 
5 B. uric tams 
6 N. h. nrnhiea 
A. E. pyramiclenn Antivenom B. E. coloratrrs antivenom 
k Da, 
67 - 
of Ow 
23 ,& 
'_ 345671? 34567 
C. C. ceiastes antivcnom 
94kl)a 
67k )aWM 
4, k Da Of 
30k1)ap 
23kDa a* 
, 567 
Figure 4.1 1 illustrates the Western 
blotts obtained when venoms from 
E. pv'rcuiiklum. F. c olol afus, 
E. occ'//u/r,. s, C. cc'rusles. 
B. cu ie lams, N h. unibicu and 
W. ueirvptia were separated by 
10% SDS-PAGE and transferred 
to nitrocellulose paper (NC P). 
The (NCP) was then incubated 
with antivenom (200mg/I) raised 
against (A) E. prrcnnidcuu. 
(B) E. colorab s, (C) C. cerasles", 
(D) B. urielcnis and (E) N. h. arabicu 
for Ihr at rt. After washing and 
incubation with donkey antisheep I`, G 
coupled to horseradish peroxidase 
for I hr at rt the strips were incubated 
with substrate until the hands 
were well developed. 
D. B. arielans antivenom 
dl"' kl): 
234567 
E. N. h. arahica antivenom 
9dkDa 
i h7kl)a 
l'k1)a 
}Okl)a 
23kI): ( 
123 .4567 
However only five bands were detected by the N. h. arabica antivenom while normal 
sheep serum did not bind to any of the venom components. The problem with using this 
method was that although clear bands developed, the background gradually deteriorated, 
often before a photograph had been taken. Unfortunately fewer bands were detected by 
SDS-PAGE. 
Cross-neutralisation was also assessed by incubating each antivenom with seven 
venoms, separated by SDS-PAGE and transfered to a nitrocelluose membrane. The 
antibodies raised against the viper venoms in this study bound only two of the elapid 
venom bands (N. h. arabica and W. aegyptia). The antibodies raised against E. 
pyramidum venom bound most of the low MWt components found in E. coloratus 
venom and most of the high MWt components of C. cerastes and B. arietans venoms. 
Antibodies raised against E. coloratus venom bound most of the components found in 
E. pyramidum venom and also six bands of C. cerastes venom and three bands of B. 
arietans venom. C. cerastes antibodies bound most of the high MWt components 
found in E. pyramidum venom and more than nine bands with E. coloratus venom. 
Antibodies raised against B. arietans venom bound most of high MWt components 
found in E. pyramidum, E. coloratus and C. cerastes venoms whereas only two bands 
were produced with the N. h. arabica and W. aegyptia venoms. The N. h. arabica 
antivenoms bound four low MWt bands of E. pyramidum venom and only two bands 
of the other viper venoms, whereas more bands were bound with W. aegyptia venom 
(Figure 4.11). 
4.6.2 Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay 
Microtitre plates were coated with the different venoms and then incubated with the IgG 
fraction of the various ovine antivenoms. Cross-neutralisation was expressed as a 
percentage of the titre obtained with the venom used for immunisation. 
The IgG fraction of the antivenom raised against E. pyramidum venom showed the 
highest cross-reactivity with E. coloratus venom, a lower values with C. cerastes 
venom and less than 20% cross-reactivity with venom from B. arietans, N. h. arabica 
and W. aegyptia (Figure 4.12). Antivenom raised against E. coloratus venom showed 
the highest titre with E. pyramidum venom and similar values to the E. pyramidum 
antivenom with the remaining venoms. The antivenoms raised against C. cerastes and 
B. arietans venoms showed a maximum cross-reactivity of only 40% with both Echis 
venoms and less than 10% against N. h. arabica and W. aegyptia venoms. The 
antivenom raised against N. h. arabica venom showed maximum cross-neutralisation 
with W. aegyptia venom followed by 35% with E. pyramidum venom and less with 
other viper venoms (20%). 
4.6.3 Small Scale Affinity Chromatography 
Small scale affinity chromatography columns were prepared by coupling venoms to 
Sepharose 4B and these were treated with fixed amounts of the IgG fractions raised 
against different venoms. Cross-reactivity was expressed as a percentage of the protein 
recovered from the column relative to that obtained from the homologous antivenom. 
The IgG fraction raised agianst E. pyramidum venom bound best to the column 
coupled with E. coloratus venom and showed only low cross-reactivity (22-45%) 
with all remaining venoms (Figure 4.13). The IgG fraction raised against E. coloratus 
venom showed the highest cross-reactivity with the column of E. pyramidum venom 
(80%) and less (20-30%) with the remainder. The C. cerastes antivenom showed the 
highest percentage recovery from the column of E. coloratus venom (70%), followed 
by E. pyramidum venom and lower with the remainder. Maximum cross-reactivity for 
the B. arietans antivenom was with C. cerastes venom (40%), followed by E. 
pyramidum venom. Finally the antivenom raised against N. h. arabica venom showed 
a reasonable cross-reactivity with W. aegyptia venom (60%) but lower values (15- 
30%) with viper venoms. 
Figure 4.12 Percentage Cross-Reactivity of Ovine Antivenoms with Venoms 
from Saudi Arabian Venomous Snakes. 
Venom Used for Coating Microtitre Plate 
  E. pyramiduinME. coloratus  C. cerastes 0B. arielans 
  N. h. arabica   W. aegyptia 
Microtitre plates were coated with the different venoms (200ng/well) and then incubated 
with the IgG fraction of the various ovine antivenoms raised against E. pyramidum 
(El), E. coloratus (E2), C. cerastes (C. c), B. arietans (B. a) and N. h. arabica (N. h. a) 
venoms. Cross-reactivity was expressed as a percentage of the titre obtained with the 
venom used for immunisation. Antivenom raised against E. pyramrdum venom 
showed the highest cross-reactivity with E. coloralus venom and antivenom raised 
against E. coloratus venom likewise showed the highest cross-reactivity with E. 
pyramiduin venom. The antivenom raised against N. h. arabica venom showed 
greatest cross-reactivity with W. aegypta venom. 
EI E2 C. c B. a N. b. a 
Figure 4.13 Percentage Cross-Reactivity of Ovine Antivenoms with Venoms from Saudi Arabian Venomous Snakes. 
Venom Coupled to Affinity Columns 
" E. pyranrrdum M E. co10ralus 0C. cerasles B. arielans N. h. arabica  W. aegyplia 
v, 40 
Small scale affinity chromatography columns were prepared 
by coupling each of the 
venoms to Sepharose 4B. These were then incubated with a fixed amount of an 
fraction raised against the venom from E. pyramidum (El), 
E. coloratus (E2), C. 
cerastes (C. c), B. arietans (B. a) and N. h. arabica (N. h. a). Cross-reactivity was 
expressed as a percentage of the value obtained using the homologous antivenom. 
pyramidum antivenom showed the highest degree of binding to the column coupled 
with Ecoloratus venom and Ecoloratus antivenom 
likewise showed the highest 
degree of binding to the column coupled with E. pyramidum venom. 
C. cerastes 
antivenom bound best the column coupled with E. coloratus venom and N. 
h. arabica 
antivenom showed a moderate degree of binding to the column coupled with 
aegyptia venom. 
r, A 12 ('. c F3 a N. h. a 
4.7 DISCUSSION 
A lack of availability and the poor neutralising potency of commercial antivenoms has 
preventing effective treatment of the majority of patients subjected to snakebite in Saudi 
Arabia. In this study specific antibodies were raised in sheep against venoms from five 
of the most venomous snakes found in Saudi Arabia. The resultant antivenoms were 
designed to alleviate the toxicity of the envenoming, while minimising possible side 
effects. 
Conventional immunisation of horses to produce antivenom follows a 
hyperimmunisation schedule in which venom is given repeatedly at short intervals in 
rapidly increasing doses of up to 1200mg per injection (Russell, 1988). Initially, 
antibody levels increase progressively in the horse, but this may be followed by a 
decline in titre after further injections of large venom doses (Christensen, 1966; 
Bouquet, 1979). The necessity for large amounts of venom (which are almost certainly 
detrimental to the condition of the animal) is, in part, due to the intolerance of horses 
to such oil-based adjuvants as Freund's complete and incomplete adjuvants. Sheep, in 
which the immune response is predominantly humoral, do not demonstrate the severe 
local reactions manifested in horses when such adjuvants are used and, therefore, have 
an enhanced immune response with much higher circulating antibody levels than 
found in horses. 
In the present study every sheep immunised with a low dose (0.5mg) of any of the 
venoms responded well as assessed by ELISA titres and small scale affinity 
chromatography. Increasing the dose up to 4mg resulted in a marked improvement in 
the response to N. h. arabica, B. arietans and C. cerastes venoms. The usefulness of 
an antiserum will depend on its antibody titre, its specificity and the affinity with 
which the antibody populations bind the toxic components of the appropriate venom. 
Affinity purification should theoretically serve to remove all contaminants and all the 
non-specific immunoglobulins leaving only specific antibody populations which 
comprise some 20-25% of the total immunoglobulin pool. ELISA is presently the most 
popular technique employed to assess antibody titres. However, it is not certain that all 
venom components are equally well absorbed to the microtitre plates employed and, 
therefore, that such titres are an accurate reflection of the presence of therapeutically 
important antibodies. Thus while ELISA confirms an antibody response it gives no 
detailed information as to how broad has been the spectrum of the response. This may 
also vary between an antivenom raised against a complex viperid venom or against an 
elapid venom containing fewer components. 
All the antivenom fractions prepared, as shown by SDS-PAGE and FPLC gel 
filtration, were at least 95% pure with only minor contaminants present. The major 
protein bands detected by SDS-PAGE also showed as peaks by gel filtration, but 
minor bands visible by SDS-PAGE were not always apparent by FPLC. Ammonium 
sulphate is commonly used to precipitate immunoglobulin but we prefer the sodium 
salt because it results in a pellet that is more easily reconstituted; the procedure is 
carried out at room temperature rather than 4C; the product contains lower levels of 
albumin; and the addition of potentially toxic ammonium ions is avoided. It has also 
been suggested that ammonium sulphate may irreversibly denature immunoglobulin 
and reduce the yield of viable antivenom (Sullivan, 1987). Possible contaminants of 
Fab are albumin, haem, Fc, IgG and reagents used in the proccesing of antiserum, such 
as papain. The Fc region of the immunoglobulin molecule is responsible for effector 
functions such as complement binding and macrophage activation and may, therefore, 
be responsible for many of the hypersensitivity reactions. 
The antivenoms raised in this study completely neutralised the PLA2 and 
phosphodiesterase activities of their respective venoms. This is 
important since the 
PLA'2s are expected to cause most of the damage that follows envenoming. Less 
antivenom was required to neutralise the indirect haemolytic activity of the venoms, as 
only some of the PLA2's are haemolytic. Kemparaju and colleagues (1994) reported 
that rabbit polyclonal antibodies prepared against PLA2 obtained from Indian E. 
pyramidum venom did not neutralise the lethality of the PLA2 isolated from E. 
pyramidum venom. Hyaluronidase activity was neutralised by the ovine antivenoms and 
this would, hopefully, retard the oedema and other local manifestations. 
The monospecific antivenoms completely inhibited initiation of platelet aggregation 
induced by C. cerastes and B. arietans venoms. However, the antivenom raised against 
C. cerastes venom did not neutralise the factors inhibiting the ADP activity. Echis 
specific Fab provided good protection, both in vivo and in vitro, against procoagulant, 
haemorrhagic, necrotising and defibrinogenating effects. It has been claimed that 
haemorrhagic factors have several antigenic determinants and that it is unlikley that a 
single antibody could neutralise the haemorrhagic activity completely (Perez et al., 
1984). However, isolation of antibodies from antivenoms using various venom factors 
such as toxins, haemorrhagins or myotoxic PLA2 (Lomonte et at, 1985) is a useful 
procedure for analysing the role that a specific venom component plays in 
envenomation. The conventional way to assess the effectiveness of an antivenom is to 
determine its ability to protect mice against set amounts of venom. The ED50 of 
specific Fab fragments in mice suggests that each antivenom contains Fab populations 
which bind to and neutralise the most toxic venom components. The large amount of 
antivenom required to protect mice against N. h. arabica venom may reflect the fact 
that elapid venom contains highly toxic, small MWt neurotoxins, which are of low 
immunogenicity. 
Western blotting showed that most venom components detected on SDS-PAGE were 
bound by antibody populations present in the antivenom. Venoms consist of many 
different components, and the closer the evolutionary relationship between species the 
more common components are found. Western blotting of the antivenoms raised against 
venom from the two Echis species showed a broad range of antibody populations 
directed against most of each venom's components. Western blotting also showed that 
all the viper antivenoms bound to a reasonable extent the five venoms used in this study. 
However, binding does not necessarily equate to neutralisation of the pharmacological 
effects of the venom. The cross-reactivity studies undertaken by ELISA gave similar 
results to those from small scale affinity chromatography. Thus two antivenoms raised 
against Echis species venoms showed good cross-reactivity with each other while the 
N. h. arabica antivenom showed less binding with viper venoms. Mohammed and 
colleagues (1980) reported that both the monospecific and bispecific equine 
antivenoms raised against C. cerastes and C. viper venoms were equally efficient in 
neutralising their lethality to mice. 
In conclusion, we have shown the suitability of sheep as an alternative to horses for 
antivenom production and by means of a dose response study, the appropriate dose of 
each venom to employ. The resultant monospecific antivenoms were effective in 
neutralising enzymatic and biological effects and protected mice in LD50 studies. 
Finally no specific antivenoms exist for some of venomous snakes found in Saudi 
Arabia and it is anticipated that the ovine Fab products will be several times more 
effective (and much safer) than the existing antivenoms, which are of equine origin. 
CHAPTER V 
COMPARISON OF OVINE AND EQUINE ANTIVENOMS 
5.1 SUMMARY 
To compare the efficacy of antibody fragments with that of intact IgG, the 
immunoglobulin fraction of antivenom was partially purified by sodium sulphate 
precipitation and digested either with papain to form Fab fragments or with pepsin to 
produce F(ab)2. All antivenom products raised against the five venoms used in this 
study neutralised the enzymatic and biological activities of the venoms. However, the 
molar amounts of the F(ab)2 and Fab fractions required exceeded that of IgG in most 
in vitro assays. Many antivenoms are raised against a mixture of venoms and two 
monospecific and one polyspecific antivenom were raised against E. pyramidum and 
E. coloratus venoms. The polyspecific ovine Fab adequately neutralised the 
enzymatic and biological effects and protected mice against lethal amounts of both 
venoms but was less efficient than the monospecific antivenoms. 
Two commercial polyspecific equine F(ab)2 antivenoms currently available in Saudi 
Arabia are produced by Pasteur-Merieux (France) and Behringwerke AG (Germany) 
and these were compared with the ovine antivenoms. Affinity purification of the 
Behringwerke and Pasteur products showed that 3 to 13% of the F(ab)2 were directed 
against venom components. They partially neutralised the enzymatic and biological 
activities of the venom but large amounts were required to protect mice against a 
lethal dose. 
5.2 COMPARISON OF IgG, F(ab)2 AND Fab FRACTIONS 
The production and assessment of IgG and Fab fractions were described in Chapter IV. 
5.2.1 Pepsin Digestion of Ovine IgG 
To prepare ovine F(ab)2, bleeds were pooled and salt precipitated. The precipitate 
(mainly IgG) was digested with pepsin and purified by salt precipitation as described in 
Chapter 11. Digestion was monitored by SDS-PAGE, FPLC and ELISA. SDS-PAGE 
showed one major band and faint bands at a MWt under 67 kDa could be seen in both 
commercial and specific ovine F(ab)2 (Figure 5.1) whereas FPLC gel filtration showed 
two peaks of which the first had a MWt above 669kDa and the second, representing 
95% of applied protein, a MWt of 98kDa (Figure 5.2). Only small amounts of albumin 
were still present in the final products (0.01 to 0.6mg/1) whereas up to 44mg/l of Fc was 
found (Table 5.1). 
Small scale affinity columns comprising the venoms coupled to Sepharose 4B were 
incubated with 0.5m1 of the various ovine F(ab)2 fractions and the total concentrations 
eluted varied from 5 to 7g/1 (Table 5.1). Measured by ELISA, the F(ab)2 fractions 
showed antibody titres ranging from 170 to 300 x103 against the five venoms (Table 
5.1). The ovine F(ab)2 was finally concentrated by freeze-drying and resuspended in 
5.2.2 Neutralisation of Enzymatic Activities 
The ovine IgG antivenoms and their F(ab)2 and Fab fractions completely neutralised the 
PLA2 activity of the various venoms (Table 5.2). Whereas the IgG and F(ab)2 fractions 
of the antivenoms raised against E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms were equally 
efficient, more F(ab)2 and Fab than IgG was required to neutralise the remaining 
antivenoms. All fractions completely inhibited the phosphodiesterase and hyaluronidase 
activity of the five venoms used in this study and, in general, less IgG than F(ab)2 and 
Fab was required to obtain maximum neutralisation. For most antivenoms, the F(ab)2 
and Fab were equally effective. 
94kDa 
67kDa 
43kDa 
3 OkDa 
SDS- PAGE of Equine and Ovine F(ab)2 Antivenoms 
arrl 
23kDa 
Figure 5.1 Compares the profiles of equine F(ab)2 produced by Beheringwerke, Pasteur 
and ovine F(ab)2 (lane 2,3 and 4) respectively as resolved by 10% 
SDS-PAGE under 
non-reducing conditions. 151 of each product (49g/9l) were loaded. 
Lane 1 shows the 
MWt marker. Faint bands at a MWt of under 67KDa could be seen 
in both commercial 
and ovine antivenoms. 
Figure 5.2 FPLC Gel Filtration of Ovine F(ab)2 Antivenom 
M wt. 
% of total 
Protein 
Retention 
time (min) 
1 >669 5 7 
2 98 95 12.1 
Retention Time (min) 
)vine F(ab)2 (200g) was analysed by FPLC 
el filtration on a Superose 12 HR column. 
qualibrated and run in 154 mM NaCl at pH 5.5 
nd the absorbance read at 280nm. 
5 10 13 
I.. I 
u an b C7 
a T  
'  
UO yU.  
Table 5.2 The Efficacy of IgG and its F(ab)2 and Fab Fragments in Inhibiting 
Enzymatic Activities Expressed as g Antivenom/g Venom. 
Antivenom 
raised 
against 
Phospholipase A2 Phosphodiesterase Hyaluronidase 
IgG F(ab)2 Fab IgG F(ab)2 Fab IgG F(ab)2 Fab 
E. pyramidum 250 250 500 160 320 320 10 10 10 
E. coloratus 250 250 500 160 320 320 10 13 13 
C. cerastes 63 125 125 40 80 80 15 20 20 
B. arietans 63 125 125 80 160 160 10 13 13 
N. h. arabica 250 500 500 160 320 320 10 15 20 
Table 5.2 compares the efficacy of monospecific ovine IgG, F(ab)2 and Fab fractions to 
inhibit the 
phospholipase A2, phosphodiesterase and hyaluronidase activities of venom 
from E. pyramidum, E. 
coloratus, C. cerastes, B. arietans and N. h. arabica. These values were corrected 
for values 
obtained from normal sheep serum. 
5.2.3 Neutralisation of Biological Activities 
Equal amounts of IgG, F(ab)2 and Fab offered complete protection against coagulation 
caused by E. pyramidum venom whereas more F(ab)2 and Fab than IgG was required to 
inhibit coagulation caused by E. coloratus venom (Table 5.3). To neutralise indirect 
haemolysis the three fractions of the antivenom raised against C'. cerastes venom were 
equally efficient, whereas double the amount of Fab and F(ab)2 compared with IgG were 
required for the remaining antivenoms. 
5.3 COMPARISON OF OVINE MONOSPECIFIC AND POLYSPECIFIC 
ANTIVENOMS RAISED AGAINST E. PYRAMIDUM AND E. COLORATUS 
VENOMS 
5.3.1 Production and Assessement of Antivenoms 
For primary immunisation groups of three sheep were injected with 0.5mg venom from 
E. pyramidum or E. coloratus or with 0.5mg of an equal mixture of the two venoms. 
This was doubled after four weeks to 1 mg and the sheep continued to be immunised at 
monthly intervals with this amount. Serum samples from individual sheep were assessed 
by ELISA and small scale affinity chromatography two weeks after each immunisation, 
as described in Chapter II. 
The antibody levels rose rapidly and, by 22 weeks after the primary immunisation, 
most sheep had reached a maximum (Figure 5.3). The average ELISA titre 
for the E. 
pyramidum antivenom was 1.7 x 106 and for the E. coloratus antivenom 2.1 X106 . 
polyspecific Echis antivenom showed very similar values with average titres of 
1.6x106 against E. pyraridum venom and 2.1x106 against E. coloratus venom. 
Specific immunoglobulin concentrations rose to a maximum quicker than ELISA titres 
(Figure 5.4). The average concentration throughout the 70 week study period 
for the E. 
pyramidum antivenom was 12g/l and for the E. coloratus venom 11.8g/l. 
The mixed 
Table 5.3 The Efficacy of Immunoglobulin and Their Intact F(ab)2 and Fab 
Fraction to Neutralise Biological Activities (g/g Venom). 
Antivenom 
raised against: 
Coagulation Indirect haemolysis 
IgG F(ab)2 Fab IgG F(ab)2 Fab 
E. pyramidum 125 125 125 50 100 100 
E. coloratus 100 167 167 100 200 200 
C. cerastes NA NA NA 50 50 50 
N. h. arabica NA NA NA 50 100 100* 
Table 5.3 compares the efficacy of monospecific ovine IgG, F(ab)2 and Fab fractions 
to inhibit coagulant and indirect haemolytic activities of venom from E. pyramidum, E. 
coloratus, C. cerastes and N. h. arabica. 
*: Maximum inhibition 90% and NA: No venom activity 
Figure 5.3 Monthly ELISA Titres for Serum Samples from Sheep Immunised with 
(A) E. pyramidum, (B) E. coloratus, (C) Mixed Echis and Tested Against 
E. pyramidum and (D) Mixed Echis and Tested Against E. coloratus Venom. 
2o s1 
1000 W 
1Jam' 
0.0 10 20 30 40 50 80 70 
WEEKS POST ANAMISATION 
3000(C) 
f9 1000 $3 
OA 10 20 30 40 50 80 TO 
WEEKS POST NAMUNISATION 
3000- 
2500- 
OA 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
WEEKS POST IWIMSATION 
, 2000 
t 1500 
1000 --'-- 
w a St 
0.0 10 20 30 40 5,0 60 70 
WEEKS POST WJMSA710N 
Serum samples were assessed by ELISA from groups of three sheep immunised monthly with 
l mg of venom from E. pyramidum, E. coloratus and mixed Echis. The sheep were bled two 
weeks after each immunisation and each point represents the mean for three sheep. 
Echis antivenom again showed similar values with average specific immunoglobulin 
concentrations of 11.5g/1 against E. pyramidum venom and 11.4g/l against E. 
coloratus venom. After 32 weeks bleeds of each antivenom were pooled, the 
immunoglobulin fraction isolated and Fab fragments prepared as described in Chapter 
5.3.2 Neutralisation of Enzymatic and Biological Activities 
The polyspecific Fab antivenom completly neutralised the PLA2, PDE and HYL 
activities of both E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms (Table 5.4). However, 
considerably less (30-70%) was required of the monospecific antivenoms. The 
polyspecific ovine Fab also neutralised the coagulant and indirct haemolytic activities of 
both Echis venoms. To protect mice against lethal doses of the venoms less of the 
monospecific antivenoms compared with the polyspecific antivenom were required. 
5.3.3 Neutralisation of Nigerian E. ocellatus Venom Activities 
Antivenoms raised against Echis species are reported to show variable neutralisation of 
venoms from the same species of snake but which have been collected from different 
geographical locations. To study this, the biological and enzymatic activities of venoms 
from Saudi Arabian E. pyramidum and Nigerian E. ocellatus were compared and the 
neutralisation of these activities by the monospecific ovine antivenom raised against E. 
pyramidum venom was assessed. Both venoms showed similar PDE and HYL activity 
but E. pyramidum venom had four times higher PLA2 activity (Table 5.5). 
Haemorrhagic, necrotic and defibrinogenating activities were similar but the coagulant 
activity of E. ocellatus venom was four times higher. E. ocellatus venom also had a 
slightly lower LD50 than E. pyramidum venom (1 compared with 1.4g/g of mouse). 
The ovine Fab antivenom raised against E. pyramidum venom showed equal 
neutralisation of PDE and HYL activity but was less effective against PLA2 activity in 
the Nigerian venom (Table 5.5). Of particular interest the antivenom in amounts up to 
1000mg, did not provide any protection against the potent procoagulant activity of 
Nigerian E. ocellatus venom. 
Figure 5.4 Monthly Specific Antibody Concentrations for Serum Samples from Sheep 
Immunised with (A) E. pyramidum, (B) E. coloratus, (C) Mixed Echis and Tested 
Against E. pyramidum and (D) Mixed Echis and Tested Against E. coloratus 
Venom. 
O 50 60 
IMUNISATION WEEKS POST M 
12 -- 
0.0 10 20 70 40 SO 60 
WEEKS POST S &NSATION 
Serum samples were assessed by small scale affinity chromatography 
from groups of three sheep 
each immunised monthly with 1mg of venom from E. pyramidum, 
E. coloratus and mixed Echis. 
The sheep were bled two weeks after each immunisation and each point represents the mean 
for three 
sheep. 
SI 11 
S3 E i j 
0.0 10 
20 90 40 50 60 70 
WEEKS POST N. MIMSATION 
10 20 30 40 5o eo 70 
WEEKS POST MIMUNISATION 
Table 5.4 The Efficacy of Ovine Polyspecific and Monospecific 
Fab to Protect Against E. pyramidum and E. coloratus 
Venom Activities (g/g). 
Venom activities Polyspecific antivenom 
E. pyramidum E. coloratus 
Monospecific antivenoms 
E. pyramtdum E. coloratus 
Phospholipase A2 750 750 500 500 
Phosphodiesterase 400 400 320 320 
Hyaluronidase 20 20 10 13 
Coagulation 250 250 125 167 
Indirect haemolysis 300 300 100 200 
ED50 16 (13-18)* 24(18-26) 11(7-14) 13(8-24) 
Table 5.4 compares the efficacy of monospecific and polyspecific ovine Fab fraction 
to neutralise lethality and inhibit the phospholipase A2, phosphodiesterase, 
hyaluronidase, coagulant and indirect haemolytic activities of E. pyramidum and E. 
coloratus venoms. 
*: 95% confidence limits 
Table 5.5 Comparison of E. pyramidum and E. ocellatus Venom Activities and 
their Neutralisation by Ovine Fab Raised Against E. pyramidum Venom 
Venom activities E. pyramidum 
venom (g) 
E. ocellatus 
venom (g) 
Neutralisation by E. pyramidum Fab g/g of 
E. pyramidum venom E. ocellatus venom 
Phospholipase Az 1 4 500 1500 
Phosphodiesterase 3 3 320 320 
Hyaluronidase 62 62 10 10 
Coagulation 4 1 125 NA 
(at 1000) 
Haemorrhagic 8 9 62 - 
Necrotic 20 30 3 - 
Defibrinogenating 7 4 143 - 
LD50 1.4 (24-33)* 1 (19-27)* 11 (7-14) - 
Table 5.5 compares the Saudi Arabian E. pyramidum and Nigerian E. 
ocellatus venom activities of phospholipase A2, phosphodiesterase, 
hyaluronidase, coagulant, haemorrhagic, necrotic, defibrinogenating and LD50. 
It shows also the efficacy of ovine Fab fraction raised against E. pyramidum 
venom to neutralise some venom activities of E. ocellatus. 
NA: No antivenom activity 
-: Not tested 
*: 95% confidence limits per 20g mouse weight 
5.4 COMPARISON OF COMMERCIAL ANTIVENOMS 
The two commercial antivenoms available in Saudi Arabia and used in this study are 
polyspecific F(ab)2 preparations of equine origin. That from Pasteur-Merieux (France) 
was raised by immunising horses with a mixture of venoms from Echis pyramidum, 
Bitis arietans and Naja haje haje. That from Behringwerke AG (Germany) contained 
antibodies directed against a mixture of venoms for Echis pyramidum, Cerastes 
cerastes and Naja haje haje. The efficacy of the commercial antivenoms was 
compared with the ovine Fab and F(ab)2 produced in this study. 
5.4.1 Physicochemical Characterisation 
All methods used for characterisation were described in Chapter II. 
5.4.1.1 Protein Concentration 
Protein concentrations were measured by optical density and the Behringwerke product 
had a value of 40g/l and that from Pasteur of 20g/1. After dialysis against phosphate 
buffered saline, to remove their preservatives, the antivenoms were freeze-dried and then 
reconstitued at a concentration of 100g/l. 
5.4.1.2 Sterility and Endotoxin Levels 
The commercial antivenoms showed no bacterial growth. The Pasteur antivenom 
showed no detectable endotoxin (<0.125EU/ml) and no inhibition of gel 
formation 
while the Behringwerke product had a low endotoxin concentration of 4 to 16EU/ml 
with no inhibition of clotting. 
5.4.1.3 SDS-PAGE and FPLC 
SDS-PAGE of the Pasteur and Beheringwerke antivenoms showed one major intense 
band (Figure 5.1) corresponding to F(ab)2. There is also a faint band in both 
corresponding to pepsin (33kDa) and two further bands with MWt of 43 and 67kDa. 
FPLC gel filtration of both antivenoms showed one major peak (I) representing equine 
F(ab)2 (Figure 5.5). The MWt for the Pasteur product was 97  5kDa and represented 
94% of total protein and that for Behringwerke was 100  4kDa and represented 96% of 
total protein. 
5.4.1.4 Small Scale Affinity Purification 
The specific antibody concentrations in the Behringwerke was ranging from 3 to 9% 
and Pasteur products ranging from 13 to 8% (Table 5.6). Pasteur showed a lower 
concentration as compared to Behringwerke against all venoms. 
5.4.1.5 Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay 
Microtitre plates were coated with different venoms and then incubated with the 
commercial antivenoms. The antibody titres of the Pasteur antivenom against the 
venoms ranged from 80 to] 50 x 103. The Behringwerke product had slightly higher titres 
ranging from 90 to 170 x 103 (Table 5.6). 
5.4.2 Neutralisation of Enzymatic Activities 
Neither the Behringwerke or Pasteur antivenoms completly neutralised PLA2, PDE or 
HYL activity of the venoms used in this study (Table 5.7). Both products were most 
effective against HYL activity, moderately so against PLA2 and 
least effective against 
PDE activity. Equal amounts were required for maximum protection 
Behringwerke generally showed higher inhibition. Smaller amounts of ovine 
F(ab)2 
and Fab completely neutralised these enzymatic activities (Table 5.2). 
Figure 5.5 FPLC Gel Filtration of Equine F(ab)2 Antivenoms 
80 -1 
(A) Beheringwerke Antivenom 
M wt. 
% of total 
protein 
Retention 
time (min) 
1 1004 96 12 
(B) Pasteur Antivenom 
% of total 
protein 
Retention 
time (min) 
1 97 5 94 12.2 
00 5( 
200g of Beheringwerke (A) equine F(ab)2 
and Pasteur (B) equine F(ab)2 were analysed 
by FPLC gel filtration on a superose 12 HR 
column. Proteins were eluted with 154 mM 20 
NaCl at pH 5.5 and the absorbance read at 280nm. 
Mean  SEM of five reading. 10 
5 10 15 
Retention Time (min) 
5 10 15 
Retention Time (min) 
Table 5.6 Concentrations and Binding Activities of Antibody Populations in the 
Two Polyspecific Equine F(ab)2 Antivenoms. 
E. pyramidum E. coloratus C. cerastes B. arietans N. h. arabfca 
Pasteur Specific 3.5(9%) 3.0 (8%) 2.0(5%) 1.2(3%) 2(5%) 
(20g/1) antibody 
ELISA 150,000 80,000 130,000 110,000 90,000 
titre 
Behring- Specific 5 (13%) 4(10%) 3(8%) 4(10%) 4.5(11%) 
werke (40g/1) antibody 
ELISA 170,000 90,000 110,000 150,000 100,000 
titre 
Table 5.6 shows the binding activity of commercial equine antivenoms with Saudi Arabian 
venoms. It shows protein and specific antibody concentrations (g/1) and ELISA antibody titres 
of the equine F(ab)2 Pasteur and Beheringwerke respectively when tested against venom 
E. pyramidum, E. coloratus, C. cerastes, B. arietans and N. h. arabica. 
Table 5.7 The Efficacy of Commercial Antivenoms to Inhibit Enzymatic 
Activities Expressed as g Antivenom/g Venom. Percentage of 
Maximum Neutralisation Obtained is Given in Brakets. 
Pasteur F(ab)2 Behringwerke F(ab)2 
Venom PLA2 PDE HYL PLA2 PDE HYL 
E. pramidum 750 320 10 750 320 10 
(70%) (30%) (70%) (90%) (50%) (80%) 
E. coloratus 1000 320 13 100 320 13 
(30%) (20%) (90%) (40%) (40%) (80%) 
C. cerastes 125 160 20 125 160 20 
(40%) (20%) (70%) (50%) (30%) (80%) 
B. arietans 125 160 13 125 160 13 
10%) (20%) (70%) (70%) (40%) (80%) 
N. h. arabica 500 320 20 500 320 20 
(50%) (10%) (60%) (90%) (30%) (80%) 
Table 5.7 compares the efficacy of equine F(ab)2 Pasteur and Beheringwerke to inhibit the 
phosphlipase A2 (PLAZ), phosphodiesterase (PDE) and hyaluronidase (HYL) activities of 
venom from E. pyf amidum, E. coloratus, C. cerastes, B. arietans and N. h. arabica. 
5.4.3 Neutralisation of Biological Activities 
Neutralisation of biological activities was measured as described in Chapter H. 
5.4.3.1 Coagulant Activity 
The same amount of both equine antivenoms offered complete protection against the 
coagulant activities of E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms (Table 5.8). Both were 
slightly more potent against E. pyramidum venom than the ovine Fab antivenom (125 
compared with 200g/g) but slightly less against E. coloratus venom (200 compared with 
167g Fab/g). 
5.4.3.2 Indirect Haemolytic Activity 
Slightly more Pasteur than Behringwerke was required (Table 5.8) and both only 
partially neutralised the activity of N. h. arabica venom. Ovine F(ab)2 and Fab 
antivenoms were significantly more effective except against E. pyramidum venom 
(Table 5.3). 
5.4.3.3 Initiation of Platelet Aggregation 
Both antivenoms showed very little protection (10%) against the platelet aggregating 
activity of C. cerastes venom (Figure 5.6 ) and the Pasteur product was surprisingly 
poor in this respect since it had been raised against this venom. Behringwerke showed 
70% inhibition of the effects induced by B. arietans venom whereas Pasteur only 
showed 5% protection. The ovine Fab antivenoms showed complete neutralisation of 
platelet aggregation by both C. cerastes and B. arietans venoms using 250 and 50g 
Fab/g venom respectively. 
Table 5.8 The Efficacy of Commercial Antivenoms to Inhibit Biological Activities, Expressed as 
g Antivenom/g Venom. Percentage of Maximum Neutralisation is Given in Brackets. 
Venom Coagulation Indirect haemolysis Initiation of platelet Haemorrhage Necrotic Defibrinogenation 
aggregation 
P B P B PB P B P B P B 
E. pyramidum 125 125 100 50 -- 125 125 12.5 12.5 142 142 
(10%) (80%) 
E. coloratus 200 200 400 200 -- 125 125 500 500 500 500 
(N) (80%) (N) (N) (N) (N) 
C. cerastes NA NA 50 50 1000 1000 - - - - - - 
(10%) 110%) 
B. arietans NA NA NA NA 1000 100 - - - - - - 
(5%) (70%) 
N. h. arabica NA NA 100 100 NA NA - - - - - - 
(90%) (90%) 
Table 5.8 shows the efficacy of commercial equine Pasteur and Beheringwerke antivenoms tested against the coagulant, indirect haemolytic, 
platelet aggregation, haemorrhagic, necrotic and defibrinogenating activities of venom from E. pyramidum, E. coloratus, C. cerastes, B. 
arietans and N. h. arabica. 
P: Pasteur, B: Beheringwerke -: Not tested, NA: No venom activity, (N) No efficacy at the highest antivenom concentration indicated. 
Figure 5.6 Neutralising Activity of Ovine and Equine Antivenoms Against 
Initiation of Platelet Aggregation By (A) C. cerastes and (B) B. arietans 
70 :r 
The efficacy of increasing concentration of Beheringwerke equine F(ab)2 (Y), Pasteur 
F(ab)2 (A) and ovine Fab (9) in inhibiting C. cerastes (A) and B. arietans (B) venom 
nduced platelet aggregation were comapred using platelet-rich plasma (PRP). Normal 
sheep serum (0) used as negative control. 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 
Antivenom Concentration (mg) 
0.2 0.4 0.8 0.8 1.0 
Antivenom Concentration (mg) 
5.4.3.4 Haemorrhagic Activity 
Both commercial antivenoms protected against the haemorrhagic activity of E. 
pyramidum venom (Figure 5.7). Behringwerke also gave partial protection (80%) 
against E. coloratus venom while the Pasteur product, in amounts up to 1000 g/g, 
showed no protection. Ovine Fab completely neutralised the activity of both venoms. 
5.4.3.5 Necrotic Activity 
Beheringwerke antivenom partially neutralised (80%) the necrotic activity of E. 
pyramidum venom, whereas Pasteur showed little protection (10%). Increasing the 
amount of both antivenoms up to 500 g/g did not give any further improvement. Neither 
antivenom inhibited the necrotic activity of E. coloratus venom. Conversely ovine Fab 
provided complete protection against E. pyramidum and E. coloratus venoms at levels 
of only 3 and 6 Fab g/g respectively. 
5.4.3.6 Defibrinogenating Activity 
Both commercial antivenoms gave complete protection against the defibrinogenating 
activity of E. pyramidum venom whereas neither protected against E. coloratus venom 
even in large amounts. (Table 5.8). 
5.4.3.7 Lethal Toxicity 
Behringwerke had an ED50 against five times the ivLD50 dose of venoms in the order E. 
pyramidum (8g/g) < B. arietans (16g/g) < E. colorarus (45g/g) < C. cerastes (80g/g) < 
N. h. arabica (187g/g). The Pasteur antivenom had ED50 values that ranged in the order 
E. pyramidum (15g/g) < B. arietans (42g/g) < E. colorarus (64g/g) < C. cerastes (65g/g) 
< N. h. arabica (193g/g) (Table 5.9). The Behringwerke antivenom was more potent 
than the Pasteur product against all the venoms studied except that from C. cerastes. 
Ovine Fab was considerably more effective than both commercial antivenoms, except 
against E. pyramidum venom, for which its activity was similar to that of Behringwerke 
(Table 5.3). 
Figure 5.7 The Efficacy of Ovine and Equine Antivenoms Against the Haemorrhagic 
Activity of Venoms from Saudi Arabian (A) E. pyramidum (B) E. coloratus 
The efficacy of increasing concentrations of Beheringwerke equine F(ab)2 (Y), Pasteur 
F(ab)2 (A) and ovine Fab (0) in inhibiting the haemorrhagic activity of venom from E. 
pyramidum (A) and E. coloratus (B) were compared. Venom and antivenom mixes were 
injected into the dorsal skin of rats. After 24 hours the animals were killed, the dorsal 
skin removed, and the diameter of the lesions measured on the inner surface of the skin. 
Normal sheep serum (Q) used as negative control. 
0.0 02 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 
Antivenom Concentration (mg) 
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 
Antivonom Concentration (mg) 
Table 5.9 ED50 of the Commercial Antivenoms Tested Against Venoms from 
Saudi ArabianVenomous Snakes 
Venom of Pasteur F(ab)2 
gg F(ab)2 /g (mouse) g F(ab)2 /g venom 
E. pyramidum 105 (1400-3100)* 15 
E. coloratus 350 (5800-7900) 64 
C. cerastes 195 (3200-4300) 65 
arietans 1220 (2900-5300) 42 
N. h. arabica 290 193 
Behringwerke F(ab)2 
gg F(ab)2 /mouse g F(ab)2 /g venom 
1100 (800-600)* 8 
5000 (3800- 45 
6300) 
4800 (3500- 80 
1700 (1100- 16 
2500) 
5600 (300-6300) 187 
Table 5.9 lists the effective dose of the commercial F(ab)2 Pasteur and Beheringwerke 
against five times the lethal dose (ivLD50) of venom from E. pyramidum, E. coloratus, C. 
cerastes, B. arietans and N. h. arabica. Mice receive increasing doses of antivenom and 
the number of survivors in each group were counted after 24hr. The analysis of the slope 
of the dose-response regressions for the ED50 was performed by the probit method. 
* 95% confidence limits per 20g (mouse weight) 
5.7 DISCUSSION 
The commercial antivenoms available in Saudi Arabia are produced by Pasteur-Merieux 
(France) and Behringwerke AG (Germany) by immunising horses. The antisera are then 
subjected to pepsin digestion of the immunoglobulins and purified and concentrated by 
salt precipitation to produce bivalent F(ab)2 fragments which lack the C terminal Fc 
domains (Latifi, 1978). It is this region of the IgG molecule that is responsible for cell 
and complement binding and through which many of the hypersenstivity reactions are 
mediated. The prevalence of horses as a source of immune serum is largely historical 
since serotherapy developed at the start of this century when horses were plentiful. In 
this study, sheep were employed. 
There are many variables in the production of an antivenom such as differences in the 
venom pools, the immunisation and bleeding schedules and the processing techniques. 
The ovine antivenoms were raised using a low-dose, infrequent immunisation schedule 
whereas conventional hyperimmunisation schedules were used for the equine products. 
The purity of the final antivenom depends on removing other serum proteins, ensuring 
that none of the reagents used throughout the processing remain in the final product, and 
producing a sterile and pyrogen-free product. The technique suggested by the WHO 
(1981) for purification and cleavage of antivenoms by pepsin digestion and salt 
precipitation originated with Pope (1939) and has only been modified slightly since 
then. 
The ovine F(ab)2 was produced on an analytical scale for this study whereas the equine 
products were prepared on a large scale. Ovine F(ab)2 was salt precipitated using sodium 
sulphate whereas the equine fragments were precipitated with ammonium sulphate. 
All the equine and ovine F(ab)2 fragments, as shown by 
SDS-PAGE and FPLC gel 
filtration, were at least 95% pure with only minor contaminants present. 
commercial antivenoms were sterile but the Behringwerke product contained 
levels of endotoxin. The ovine antivenoms were not produced under sterile conditions. 
Small scale affinity purification showed that the percentage of specific antibodies 
directed against venom components in the equine F(ab)2 was lower (5 to13%) than in 
the ovine F(ab)2 (19 to 25%). This is probably due to the sheep producing more specific 
immunoglobulins but might reflect the different venom pools used as immunogen. Thus 
the venom used as ligand for affinity purification was also used as the ovine 
immunogen. The equine antivenoms were also polyspecific which is likely to reduce the 
number of antibody populations against individual venoms. 
Most currently available antivenoms consist of IgG or F(ab)2, whereas Fab may offer 
certain advantages. Many studies (Russell and Wainschel 1973; Petkovic et al., 1991) 
have shown that the longer the period between envenoming and antivenom 
administration, the greater the toxic effects and the more difficult 
it is to neutralise 
venom components. Fab, because of its small molecular weight, rapidly 
distributes from 
the intravascular compartment into the interstitial space thereby gaining access 
both to 
venom components in the general circulation and those localised in tissue and at the 
site. Other advantages of Fab fragments, compared to intact IgG and F(ab)2, are that 
they may be less immunogenic and, since they possess only one binding site, do not 
form immune complexes. They are also partially excreted by the 
kidneys, whereas 
IgG is cleared by cells of the immune system (Smith et al., 
1979). 
Comparing the efficacy of ovine IgG, F(ab)2 and Fab showed that all completely 
neutralised the in vitro venom activities. However, on a weight and molar ratio, more 
Fab and F(ab)2 than IgG were required to neutralise enzymatic and 
biological activities. 
Even though IgG may have a higher binding affinity, 
it is not recommended for 
therapeutic purposes due to the hypersensitivity and other reactions 
that may be caused 
by its Fc component. The ovine Fab neutralised the lethal effect of all venoms 
in mice 
suggesting that they contain populations which bind the most 
toxic venom 
components. 
Both the mono and polyspecific ovine antivenoms raised against E. pyramidum and E. 
coloratus venoms protected mice in ED50 studies and neutralised the in vitro effects of 
the venoms. However, the monospecific antivenoms were more effective against their 
respective venoms. These findings agree with those of Kornalik and Taborska (1989) 
who reported that monospecific antivenoms provided superior protection as compared 
to polyspecific products against the lethal effects of Bothrops and E. pyramidum 
venoms. Laing and colleagues (1995) also showed that monospecific antivenoms 
(ovine Fab and South African Institute of Medical Research equine F(ab)2{SAIMR}) 
were significantly better than polyspecific antivenoms (Pasteur and Behringwerke) 
when tested against E. ocellatus venom while Mohammed and colleagues (1973) 
found that the potency of polyspecific antivenoms against the Egyptian venoms of N. 
haje and N. nigricollis was comparable for monospecific products. 
The antivenom against Saudi Arabian E. pyramidum provides good neutralisation of the 
enzymatic activities of Nigerian E. ocellatus venom but did not protect against its potent 
coagulant activity. Antigenic differences in venom obtained from different 
geographical areas over the enormous range that these snakes are found might explain 
the variable potency of particular specific Echis antivenoms. Komalik and Taborska 
(1973) even reported significant qualitiative differences in venoms from individual 
specimens of E. pyramidum caught in the same area. Latifi (1973) found the 
antivenom raised against the venom of E. pyramidum from one country might have 
little effect in neutralising the venom of E. pyramidum form another country. Iddon 
and colleagues (1985) showed that monoclonal antibodies against a haemorrhagin 
from one E. pyramidum venom was very specific for this particular venom, and no 
reactivity was observed with E. pyramidum from other areas. 
The commercial antivenoms showed similar binding activity with venom components 
from closely related viperid species as well as from some elapid species. 
Both bound all 
the venoms tested, but progressively more antivenom was required 
in the order E. 
pyramidum < B. arietans < C. cerastes < E. coloratus < N. 
h. arabica for the 
Behringwerke whereas Pasteur was in the order E. pyramidum < C. cerastes < B. 
arietans < E. coloratus < N. h. arabica venoms. Similar results were obtained from 
small scale affinity chromatography. Both antivenoms showed similar trends apart from 
C. cerastes venom (used as immunogen for Pasteur) and B. arietans venom 
(immunogen for Behringwerke). Behringewerke showed better protection in mice than 
the Pasteur antivenom. The commercial equine F(ab)2 showed partial neutralisation 
against the enzymatic activities of the five venoms used in this study and complete 
neutralisation of the coagulant and indirect haemolytic activities. However, they did not 
neutralise initiation of platelet aggregation induced by C. cerastes and B. arietans 
venoms (except partial neutralisation by Behringwerke against B. arietans venom). Both 
protected against haemorrhagic activity of E. pyramidum venom using a high amount of 
antivenom. 
The ovine Fab and F(ab)2 preparations compared well with the equine F(ab)2 products 
the lethal and other important in vivo and in vitro assays and was more effective on a 
weight-for-weight basis. This emphasizes the importance of immunising with venom 
which corresponds to the species for which the antivenom is intended. 
CHAPTER VI 
ASSESSMENT OF OVINE ANTI VENOM AGAINST DESERT BLACK COBRA 
(WALTERINNESIA AEGYPTIA) VENOM 
6.1 SUMMARY 
The desert black cobra (Walterinnesia aegyptia) is an elapid widely distributed 
throughout the deserts of Saudi Arabia for which currently available antivenoms are 
ineffective in the treatment of its envenoming. W. aegyptia venom was assessed for 
several of its physicochemical, enzymatic and biological characteristics. Lethality in 
mice (iv LD50) was high (0.4g/g of mouse) and the venom showed marked 
neurotoxicity and haemorrhagic, haemolytic, PLA2, L-AAO and PDE activity. 
However, it had only moderate HYL activity, weak proteolytic effects and no 
coagulant, necrotic or defibrinogenating actions. 
Sheep immunised with W. aegyptia venom showed a good antibody response as 
assessed by ELISA and small scale affinity chromatography. Western blotting showed 
that antibody populations bound most of the venom components. The Fab antivenom 
adequately neutralised the enzymatic and biological effects and protected mice against 
lethal amounts of W. aegyptia venom. Fractions of ovine antibodies (F(ab)2 and Fab) 
were prepared and compared with intact ovine IgG for their neutralising capacity. The 
amounts required exceeded that of IgG in most in vitro assays. Various cross-reactivity 
methods were used to assess neutralisation by the ovine antivenom of closely related 
venoms and the highest cross-reactivity was obtained with that from N. h. arabica. 
The ovine Fab antivenom was compared with two commercial polyspecific equine 
F(ab)2 antivenoms (Behringwerke and Pasteur-Meriuex) currently available in Saudi 
Arabia. Affinity purification of these products showed that they comprised 3 and 2 g/l 
of specific antibody fragments respectively but they only neutralised 35% of the PLA2 
activity and about 50% of both the indirect haemolytic and PDE activity. HYL activity 
was equally well neutralised by the equine products. The commercial antivenoms 
showed only a weak cross-reactivity with W. aegyptia venom using ELISA and small 
scale affinity chromatography and did not protect mice against its lethal effects. 
6.2 CHARACTERISATION OF W. AEGYPTIA VENOM 
6.2.1 Physicochemical Assessment 
Reverse-phase HPLC showed 13 protein peaks with retention times ranging from 4.6 to 
30.8min (Figure 6.1a). In comparison, N. h. arabica venom showed 12 protein peaks 
with retention times ranging from 5.5 to 47.2min (Figure 6.1 b) Each venom showed the 
same profile of different batches. The results of gel filtration chromatography of W. 
aegyptia venom are shown in Figure 6.2. The venom was resolved into five fractions 
(peaks 1,2,3,4, and 5) with MWt of 150,40,20,10, and less than l OkDa as calculated 
from the calibration curve. The percentage of each peak were 15,23,7,43 and 0.2% 
respectively. The protein composition of venom from W. aegyptia was also analysed on 
10% SDS-PAGE under non-reducing conditions and showed 12 dominant bands with 
molecular weights ranging from below 23 to above 94 kDa (see Figure 3.3 p73). 
6.2.2 Enzymatic Activities 
W. aegyptia venom showed very potent PLA2 activity and 1 g produced a complete 
colour change of the pH indicator (Table 6.1). W. aegyptia venom had marked PDE 
activity and also considerable L-AAO effects. However, 
it had only minimal 
hyaluronidase and proteolytic activity. For example, using L-BAPNA or dimethyl 
casein as substrate, maximum proteolytic activity was 40% with 100g venom. 
6.2.3 Biological Activities 
All biological assays were performed as described in Chapter II and 
biological 
activities of the venom were expressed as the amount required to produce 100% 
activity. 
Figure 6.1 RP- HPLC of (A) W. aegyptia and (B) N. h. Arabica venoms 
-mLLn 
o io 40 
The venoms (200g) from W. aegyptia (A) and N. h. arabica (B) were analysed by 
reverse phase HPLC. The column (Supelco RP LC-8-DB) was equilibrated with 5% 
acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluroacetic acid (TFA) and the protein eluted with gradient of 
90% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 0.5m1/min and the absorbance read at 
280nm. 
Figure 6.2 FPLC Gel Filtration of W. aegyptia Venom 
Peak no. MWt. kDa Retention 
time (mins) 
1 150 11.9 
2 40 13.9 
3 20 15 
4 10 16 
5 <10 26.5 
200g) was analysed 
n on a Superose 12 HR 
and run in 154 mM 
ae absorbance read at 
Retention Time (min) 
5 10 15 20 25 
Table 6.1 Enzymatic and Biological Activity of W aegyptia Venom (Venom Activity 
in g) 
Type of Activity Venom Activity Minimum 
Effective Dose 
Phospholipase A2 0.5 
Phosphodiesterase 2 
Enzymatic L-amino acid oxidase 6 
Hyaluronidase 18 
Proteolytic activity 100 
Neurotoxicity 300' 
Myotoxicity 300* 
Coagulation 100* 
Biological Indirect hemolysis 25 
Haemorrhagic 12 
Defibrinogenating 10* 
Necrotic 12* 
Lethality (iv LD50)/g 0.4 
Table 6.1 lists the minimum amount of W.. aegyptia venom that is required (in g) to 
produce maximum pliosphlipase A2, phosphodiesterase, hyaluronidase, L-amino acid 
oxidase and proteolytic activities using L-BAPNA and dimethyl casein substrate. It 
also shows its, neurotoxicity, myotoxicity, coagulation, indirect haemolytic, 
haemorrhagic, necrotic, defibrinogenating and lethal activity. 
aThe minimum amount of venom required to produce 50% activity where 
1= 100%, 
3=40% 
and *= no activity. 
6.2.3.1 Coagulation and haemolytic activities 
W. aegyptia venom in amount up to 100g had no coagulant activity as assessed using 
both human plasma and bovine fibrinogen. The venom had powerful indirect haemolytic 
activity, when using human erythrocytes and phosphatidylcholine as substrate, with 
25g inducing 100% haemolysis (Table 6.1). However, in the absence of substrate, 
10099 of venom caused only 20% direct haemolysis. 
6.2.3.2 Neurotoxicity and myotoxicity 
Neurotoxicity and myotoxicity were studied using the mouse phrenic nerve 
hemidiaphragm preparation. The venom was shown to progressively depress and finally 
abolish muscle contractions caused by indirect stimulation, while the response to direct 
stimulation was not affected. Concentrations of 2.5 and 5mg/l produced complete 
inhibition of muscle contraction in 100 7 and 60  5min respectively, while 1.25mg/l 
inhibited 90% of muscle contraction in 70  10min (Figure 6.3). Repeated washing 
every 30min with Krebs' solution resulted in a partial recovery of 40% and 80% 
respectively to indirect stimulation of the muscle previously treated with 2.5mg/l and 
1.25mg/l of W. aegyptia venom (Figure 6.4). Neurotoxic activity was dose dependent, 
as shown by the time taken to reach 80% paralysis at three different concentrations 
(1.25,2.5 and 5mg/1) of venom, with results of 45,30 and 20min respectively (Figure 
6.4). 
6.2.3.3 Haemorrhagic, necrotic and defibrinogenating activities 
W. aegyptia venom showed high and dose dependent in vivo haemorrhagic activity and 
12g (minimum haemorrhagic dose) produced a lesion of I Onun diameter on the dorsal 
skin of rats 24hr later (Figure 6.5). It had no necrotic activity when injected 
intradermally to rats in amounts up to 50g, when checked three days later. At a 
higher 
venom concentration the rats died within 4hrs probably due to the neurotoxicity of the 
venom. W. aegyptia venom had no significant effect on defibrinogenating activity, after 
intravenous injection of up to 12g. 
Figure 6.3 Neurotoxicity and Myotoxicity of W. aegyptia Venom 
jIII. 
i; ; ; 
A mouse phrenic nerve hemi-diaphragm incubated with 5 (U), 2.5 (0) and 1.25 (A) 
mg/I of W. aegyptia venom for 30 min. No change in muscle contraction was recorded 
after direct (muscle) stimulation (solid line) whereas a marked change in muscle 
contraction was recorded after indirect (nerve) stimulation (broken line). Results are 
expressed as the mean  SEM of four preparations. Preparation was washed every 
30min. 
0 30 50 100 150 200 250 
wash Time, min 
Figure 6.4 Dose Response Curve for Venom Using Indirect (Nerve) Stimulation 
4w 20 
Venom concentration. mg/L 
Figure 6.4 shows the dose dependent, neurotoxic activity of W. aegyptia venom. 1.25, 
2.5 and 5mg/l venom caused 80% of total paralysis after 45,25 and 20 minutes 
respectively. 
0 1.25 2.5 5 
Figure 6.5 Haemorrhagic Activity of W. aegyptia Venom 
B lid 
D . j. 
N `4s 
Figure 6.5 shows the haemorrhagic lesions produced when different concentrations of 
W. aegyptia venom (A 12g, B 64g, C 3g, D 1.5g, E 0.75g and F 0.375g) were 
injected into the dorsal skin of rats. After 24 hours the animals were killed, the dorsal 
skin removed, and the diameter of the lesions measured on the inner surface of the skin, 
in two directions at right angles, using calipers and background illumination. The mean 
diameter of the haemorrhagic lesion was calculated for each venom dose and the MHD 
was estimated by plotting the mean diameter against dose and reading off the dose 
corresponding to a 10mm lesion. 
6.2.3.4 Lethality 
The W. aegyptia venom was very toxic to mice with an iv LD50 of 8g/mouse (0.4g/g) 
and 95% confidence limits of 4 tollg. The symptoms produced included flaccid 
paralysis of the extremities and the animals died from respiratory distress within two hr, 
which are typical findings with an elapid venom containing a powerful neurotoxin(s). 
6.3 OVINE ANTIVENOM 
All the methods were described in Chapter II. 
6.3.1 Characterisation of Ovine Antivenom 
Bleeds taken 32 weeks after primary immunisation from three sheep immunised with 
W. aegyptia venom were pooled, filtered and the immunoglobulin fraction purified by 
salt precipitation (Chapter II). The total protein concentration of the serum pools was 
60g/l and, of this, about 40% was removed in the supernatant leaving 60% in the 
immunoglobulin fraction (Table 6.2). SDS-PAGE showed that salt precipitation 
removed most of the albumin, while virtually all the immunoglobulins appeared in the 
precipitate. The serum IgG fraction eluted as single peak on FPLC. 
The immunoglobulin fraction (520m1) was then digested with papain, to give a product 
that was 96% Fab as assessed by gel filtration FPLC. SDS-PAGE showed that the 
immunoglobulins, and many other components present in smaller quantities in the IgG 
fraction, had disappeared after papain digestion leaving only one band of approximately 
46kDa MWt. 
To prepare the ovine F(ab)2, bleeds from sheep immunised with W. aegyptia venom 
were pooled, salt precipitated and the precipitate (mainly IgG) digested with pepsin 
(20mg/g IgG) and purified by salt precipitation as described in Chapter II. The ovine 
F(ab)2 was finally concentrated by freeze-drying and resuspended in PBS (Table 6.2). 
Table 6.2 Preparation of Immunoglobulins and their Fractions from W. aegyptia 
Antivenom 
Serum pool I IgG fraction I Fab fraction I F(ab)2 fraction 
Protein, g/1 
60 34 16 18 
Specific antibody, g/l I 
ELISA titre 
150,000 1 130,000 1 35,000 1 75,000 
Table 6.2 lists the protein and specific antibody concentrations (g/1) and ELISA antibody titres 
of the serum, IgG, F(ab)2 and Fab fractions raised against W. aegyptia venom. The 
immunoglobulin fraction was purified by salt precipitation then cleaved with papain to produce 
Fab or pepsin to produce F(ab)2. 
6.3.2 Binding Activity 
Three Welsh half breed ewes were immunised with 0.5mg of W. aegyptia venom at 
monthly intervals. The antibody titres rose to high levels within 16 weeks of the 
primary immunisation with all sheep showing similar ELISA titres (1.3,1.1 and 
1.5x105). The highest titre for the pooled serum collections throughout the two years of 
study was 3.5x 105 (Figure 6.6) and the specific antibody concentration ranged between 
7 and 9g/l as determined by small-scale affinity purification. Gradually increasing the 
dose of inununogen to 4mg/sheep/month after 40 weeks did not significantly improve 
either the antiserum titre or specific antibody concentration. 
The ELISA antibody titre of the Fab fractions appeared to fall markedly compared to 
the IgG fractions with apparent losses of 70% (Table 6.2). As discussed previously, this 
loss is apparent rather than real since detection of the antibodies and antibody 
fragments bound to venom depends on the binding by a second enzyme-labelled 
antibody reagent raised against intact ovine IgG. This will, therefore, contain many 
antibody populations directed against the Fc fraction present in intact IgG but not in 
F(ab)2 or Fab. 
6.3.4 Neutralisation of Enzymatic Activities 
Neutralisation of enzyme activities was assessed as described in Chapter II by 
determining the minimum amount of antivenom in mg required to neutralise 
completely the enzymatic activities induced by 1mg of venom (Table 6.3). Five 
hundred mg of the specific ovine Fab completely neutralised the PLA2 activity of W. 
aegyptia venom while 40mg neutralised 80% of its HYL activity. Complete 
neutralisation was obtained with 62mg of Fab fragment against PDE activity of the W. 
aegyptia venom. 
Figure 6.6 Immune Response of Three Sheep Immunised With Desert Black 
Cobra Venom. 
La 150- 
Groups of three sheep were immunised with 0.5mg of W. aegyptia venom per month 
and bled two weeks after each immunisation. Monthly bleeds were assessed by 
ELISA (A) and small scale affinity chromatography (B) (as described in section 
2.4.1.2). 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
Weeks post immunisation 
10 20 30 40 50 BO 70 
Weeks post immunisation 
Table 6.3 Comparison of Ovine and Equine Antivenoms 
Venom Activity Minimum Neutralisation Dose* 
Ovine Fab Equine F(ab)2 
Phospholipase A2 500 1000 
Phosphodiestrase 62 300 
Hyaluronidase 40' 25 
ED, o3 250 No protection 
Neurotoxicity 100 - 
Indirect haemolysis 8 160 
Haemorrhagic 10 No protection 
Table 6.3 compares the efficacy of ovine Fab and the commercial equine F(ab)2 
fractions to inhibit phospholipase A2, phosphodiesterase, hyaluronidase, indirect 
haemolytic and haemorrhagic activities of W. aegyptia venom. 
* The minimum amount of antivenom in mg required to neutralise completely 
(100%) the effect induced by 1 mg of venom, 1: Maximum neutralisation 80%, 2: 
Maximum neutralisation 35%, 3: Maximum neutralisation 50% and 4: Maximum 
neutralisation 50%. -: not tested 
6.3.4 Neutralisation of Biological Activities 
6.3.4.1 Haemolytic activity 
The amount of antivenom required to neutralise 100% of the indirect haemolytic 
activity of venom was 8mg of Fab per mg venom. A control experiment using the IgG 
fraction of normal sheep serum showed no inhibition. 
6.3.4.2 Neurotoxicity 
The neutralising efficacy of specific ovine Fab antivenom against the neurotoxic effect 
of W aegyptia venom was studied in vitro using the mouse phrenic nerve 
hemidiaphragm. Complete protection, as assessed using indirect stimulation, required 
100mg of the ovine Fab fraction per mg venom (Figure 6.7). 
6.3.4.3 Haemorrbagic activity 
The ovine Fab effectively protected against the haemorrhagic lesions normally induced 
by W. aegyptia venom (Figure 6.8) with 10mg giving complete protection against the 
haemorrhagic activity of 1mg venom (Table 6.3). 
6.3.4.4 Lethality 
The antivenom showed very potent protection with an ED50 for the Fab fraction of 
5mg/mouse and narrow confidence limits (viz 4.5-6mg/mouse). The total amount of the 
Fab fraction required for 100% protection was 250mg per mg venom. 
6.3.5 Cross-Neutralisation Studies 
Six venoms (from W. aegyptia, N. h. arabica, E. pyramidum, E. coloratus, C. cerastes 
and B. arietans) were separated on SDS-PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose paper and 
Figure 6.7 Neutralisation of Indirect Stimulation of W. aegyptia venom, Using 
Specific Ovine Fab Antivenom 
Venom and 
ANTIVENOM PREMIXED 
A mouse phernic nerve hemi-diaphragm preparation was incubated with a premixed 
solution of 5mg/l W. aegyptia venom and 500 (Q), 250 (0) or 125mg/l (A) of specific 
ovine Fab antivenom for 30min. Results are expressed as the mean  SEM of four 
preparations. Preparation was washed every 30min. 
0 30 50 100 150 200 250 
wash wash wash wish 
wash wish wash 
TIME, MIN 
A control 
Figure 6.8 Neutralisation of Haemorrhagic Activity of W. aegyptia Venom Using 
Specific Ovine Fab 
B ,: A 
Specific ovine Fab (A 500g, B 250g, 
C 125g, D 62g and E 31g) was premixed 
with 12g of W. aegyptia venom and injected 
into the dorsal skin of rats. After 24 hours 
the animals were killed, the dorsal skin removed, and 
the diameter of the lesions 
measured on the inner surface of the skin. 
The only lesion observed was with venom 
alone (F). Haemorrhagic activity was neutralised 
at all antivenom concentrations as 
evidenced by the absence of lesions. 
incubated with the IgG fraction of the antivenom raised against W. aegyptia venom. 
Antibodies raised against W. aegyptia venom bound most of its own components and a 
few of the higher MWt components found in each of the other venoms (Figure 6.9). It 
produced most bands with N. h. arabica venom. Normal sheep serum did not bind to 
any of the venom components. 
The IgG fraction of the antivenom raised against W. aegyptia venom showed the 
highest cross-reactivity in an ELISA with N. h. arabica venom (60%), followed by B. 
arietans (42%), C cerastes (36%), E. coloratus (34%) and E. pyramidum (25%) 
venoms (Figure 6.10). 
Small scale affinity purification columns were prepared using venoms from W. 
aegyptia, N. arabica, E. pyramidum, E. coloratus, C. cerastes and B. arietans coupled 
to Sepharose 4B. These were incubated with a fixed amount of the IgG fraction raised 
against W. aegyptia venom and cross-reactivity was expressed as a percentage of the 
protein obtained from the antivenom bound to each of different venoms. The highest 
percentage concentrations were obtained from the column of N. h. arabica venom 
(62%), followed by B. arietans (40%), C. cerastes (44%), E. coloratus (30%) and E. 
pyramidum (30%) venom. 
6.4 COMPARISON OF IgG, F(ab)2 AND Fab FRACTIONS 
6.4.1 Binding Activity 
A small scale affinity column comprising W. aegyptia venom coupled to Sepharose 4B 
was incubated with different amounts of antivenom fractions raised against W. aegyptia 
venom. The total concentrations eluted were 9g/l from serum and the IgG 
fraction 
whereas 7g/1 were obtained for the F(ab)2 and Fab fractions. The ELISA titres were 
320,75 and 35 x103 for IgG, F(ab)2 and Fab respectively but the technique 
does not 
enable an accurate comparison (as noted above). 
Figure 6.9 Western Blotting of W. aegyptia Ovine IgG Antivenom Against Saudi 
Arabian Elapid and Viper Venoms. 
94RD 
67kDa 
4 , Da 
3OkD2 
2 kDa 
1234567 
Venoms from E. pyramidum (lane 2), E. coloratus (lane 3), C. cerastes (lane 4), B. 
arietans (lane 5), N. h. arabica (lane 6) and W. aegyplia (lane 7) were separated on 10% 
SDS-PAGE gel, then transferred to nitrocellulose paper and incubated with antivenom 
(200mg/I) raised against W. aegyptia venom. After washing, the strips were incubated 
with donkey anti-sheep IgG coupled to horseradish peroxidase followed by incubation 
with substrate until the bands were well developed (about l0min). The strips were then 
washed in water and photographed. Lane 1 contained MWt markers. 
Figure 6.10 Percentage ELISA Cross-Reactivity of IgG Ovine Antivenom Raised Against 
W. aegjptia Venom. 
Microtitre plates were coated with the different venoms (200ng/well) Epyramidum, 
E. coloratus, C. cerastes, B. arietans, N. h. arabica and W. aegyptia and then incubated 
with the IgG fraction of the ovine antivenom raised against W. aegyptia venom. Cross- 
neutralisation was expressed as a percentage of the titre obtained with W. aegytia 
venom. The greatest degree of cross-reactivity occurred with N. 
h. arabica venom 
(60%). 
E. pyr E. c oIC. ce r B. a riNh .aW. a 
6.4.2 Neutralisation of Enzymatic and Biological Activities 
Ovine IgG antivenom and its F(ab)2 and Fab fractions completely neutralised the PLA2 
activity induced by 1g of W. aegyptia venom at doses of 250g, 500g and 5004g 
respectively. The IgG fraction of antivenom showed higher neutralising efficacy (90%) 
against the HYL activity than ovine F(ab)2 and Fab (80%). Similar amounts (250g) of 
IgG and its F(ab)2 and Fab fractions completely neutralised the PDE activity induced by 
8g of W. aegyptia venom. The total amounts required to neutralise 100% of the indirect 
haemolytic activity of 25g of venom were 100g of IgG and 2004g of both F(ab)2 and 
Fab (Figure 6.11). 
6.5 COMPARISON OF OVINE AND EQUINE ANTIVENOMS 
6.5.1 Physicochemical Assessment 
The total protein concentration of ovine F(ab)2 was 18g/1 as assessed using 
spectrophotometry (Table 6.2) and those of the Behringwerke and Pasteur products 
were 40 and 20g/l respectively. The antivenoms were dialysed against PBS to remove 
contaminants then lyophilised and the concentrations of all three adjusted to 100g/1. 
Purities were assessed individually by SDS-PAGE and showed a dominant band of 
F(ab)2 with a molecular weight of about 90kDa. There was another faint band in all the 
products with a MWt less than 50kDa. FPLC of the ovine and the commercial 
antivenoms showed one major peak representing F(ab)2 and comprising 95% of the 
total protein applied. Its MWt was about 90kDa. 
6.5.2 Binding Assays 
Antibody titres were assessed using ELISA and gave a value of 75x103 for the ovine 
F(ab)2,20x 103 for the Behringwerke product and 17x 103 for the Pasteur antivenom. 
The specific antibody concentration of the ovine F(ab)2, using small scale affinity 
chromatography, was 6g/1 as compared with values for the Behringwerke and Pasteur 
products of 3 and 2g/1 respectively. 
Figure 6.11 Neutralisation of Indirect Haemolytic Activity of W. aegyptia Venom 
Using Specific Ovine Antivenom. 
co 60 CU 
Antivenom ({. ig/tube) 
The efficacy of increasing concentrations of ovine IgG (V), F(ab)2 (A) and Fab (0) in 
neutralising the haemolytic activity of W. aegyptia venom was compared, using 
phophatidylcholine as a substrate and human erythrocytes. The activity is expressed as 
the increase in OD at 375nm. {Normal sheep IgG (") and Fab (*)} 
0 50 100 150 200 
6.5.3 Neutralisation of Enzymatic Activities 
Both commercial antivenoms could neutralise only 35% of PLA2 activity of W. 
aegyptia venom (Figure 6.12) as compared with complete neutralisation with the ovine 
F(ab)2. However both the equine F(ab)2 products were more potent against HYL 
activity with 25mg completly neutralising one mg venom (Table 6.3). The Pasteur and 
Behringwerke F(ab)2 could only partially (50%) neutralise PDE venom activity, even 
when using 300mg antivenom/mg venom (Table 6.3). This compared with the complete 
neutralisation obtained with 62mg ovine F(ab)2. 
6.5.4 Neutralisation of Biological Activities 
The two polyspecific equine antivenoms did not neutralise the haemorrhagic activity of 
W. aegyptia venom but produced 50% neutralisation of indirect haemolytic activity 
(Table 6.3). Of particular note, neither offered protection against five times the iv LD50 
dose of W. aegyptia venom (40g/mouse) even when used in amounts up to 10mg. 
6.5.5 Cross-Neutralisation Studies 
Cross-reactivities of the two polyspecific equine antivenoms were assessed using 
ELISA and small scale affinity purification for comparison with the specific ovine 
antivenom. Behringwerke antivenom showed 18% cross-reactivity and the Pasteur 
product 14% as assessed by ELISA. Affinity purification showed that 8% of 
Behringwerke and 10% of Pasteur F(ab)2 bound to components of W. aegyptia venom. 
6.6 DISCUSSION 
W. aegyptia is an extremely poisonous snake found in Saudi Arabia, and its 
envenoming is always serious and can be fatal. In the present study the iv LD50 of 
aegyptia venom was 84g/mouse which agrees with the value of 6g reported by 
Gitter 
Figure 6.12 Antivenom Neutralised Phospholipase A2 Activity of Waegyptia 
Venom Using Specific ovine Antivenom 
Antivenom (pg/tube) 
The efficacy of increasing concentrations of equine F(ab)2 Beheringwerke (*), 
Pasteur (*) and ovine F(ab)2 (A) in neutralising the phospholipase A2 activity of W. 
aegyptia venom was compared. The activity was measured using the substrate 
phosphatidylcholine and the activity expressed as the increase in OD at 375nm caused 
by different amounts of each antivenom. Normal sheep IgG was the control (M). 
31.5 62.5 125 250 500 1000 
et al. (1962), and of 13g by Hassan and Saddik (1980). Mice that received a lethal 
dose showed paralysis of the hind legs, impairment of respiration and increasing muscle 
weakness. They often had convulsions and died within two hours. Venoms from elapid 
snakes are characterised by their neurotoxic activity and W. aegyptia venom showed a 
dose-dependent inhibition of nerve stimulated muscle contractions using the mouse 
hemi-diaphragm preparation. The venom of W. aegyptia has been fractionated and 
characterised (Lee et al. 1976) with particular reference to the pharmacological 
properties of the short chain post-synaptic neurotoxins. W. aegyptia venom, unlike 
cobra and some other elapid venoms, appears to be devoid of cardiotoxic components 
(Lee, 1972), 
In this study, W. aegyptia venom showed marked haemorrhagic but little proteolytic 
activity. The haemorrhagic lesions produced at the site of snakebites have been ascribed 
to proteolytic enzymes (Houssay, 1930; Zeller, 1948) but fractionation of W. aegyptia 
venom yielded a haemorrhagin containing fraction (fraction III) which had no 
proteolytic activity when tested on gelatine, casein and denatured haemoglobin (Gitter 
et al., 1962). It seems, therefore, that the action of snake venom haemorrhagins can not 
be attributed exclusively to proteolytic enzymes. The venom did not exhibit coagulant, 
necrotic, defibrinogenating or myotoxic activity and its direct haemolytic activity was 
low (20%). The venom has high PLA2 activity. Most venoms contain different PLA2's 
and the basic PLA2's are thought to cause more biological damage than their acidic 
counterparts (Rosenberg, 1979). They hydrolyse membrane bound phospholipids and 
are responsible for many adverse effects directly or indirectly through the release of 
fatty acids and lysolecithin (e. g. lysis of erythrocytes and leukocytes, neurotoxicity, 
cardiotoxicity, cytotoxicity and local myonecrotic effects). 
In this study W. aegyptia venom was found to have high L-AAO activity. This enzyme 
is generally thought to be of low toxicity but may contribute to the local damage caused 
by this venom. PDE is one of the well known enzymes contained in snake venoms and 
hydrolyses both DNA and RNA (Miller et al., 1970) and cAMP (Suzuki et al., 1960). 
Little is known about its pharmacological effects (Sugino, 1957). 
Sheep immunised with a low dose (0.5mg) of W. aegyptia venom responded well as 
assessed by ELISA titres and small scale affinity chromatography. Increasing the 
venom dose further did not improve antibody levels. The antivenom raised against W. 
aegyptia venom completely neutralised the PLA2 and PDE activity of the venom and was 
particularly effective in protecting against indirect haemolytic activity. HYL activity was 
partially neutralised and this would, hopefully, retard the venom's distribution from the 
bite site. Ovine Fab also completely neutralised the neurotoxicity of W. aegyptia venom 
as assessed by the mouse hemidiaphragm preparation and a Fab based antivenom 
should distribute more rapidly and penetrate faster to the neuromuscular junction than 
intact IgG and F(ab)2 products due to its smaller size. The ovine Fab antivenom was 
markedly effective at neutralising the overall lethal effects of W. aegyptia venom 
suggesting that Fab populations bind most venom components. 
Western blotting showed that most components in W. aegyptia venom which were 
detected on SDS-PAGE were also bound by antibody populations present in the 
antivenom. However, it should be noted than binding does not necessarily equate to 
neutralisation of the pharmacological effects of the venom. Western blotting also 
showed that this antivenorn bound several components in N. h. arabica venom and may 
offer some protection against this species whereas there was less binding against other 
species tested. W. aegyptia and N. h. arabica belong to the same family and may have a 
similar venom composition. 
On a weight ratio more Fab and F(ab)2 than IgG was required to neutralise PLA2 and 
indirect haemolytic activity and IgG was more efficient in neutralisation studies. More 
Fab than F(ab)2 was required to neutralise PLA2 and HYL activity. 
The equine antivenoms currently available in Saudi Arabia are all polyspecific and 
subjected to pepsin digestion and salt precipitation. There are many variables in the 
production of an antivenom such as differences in the immunisation and bleeding 
schedules. The ovine antivenom was raised using a low-dosage immunisation schedule 
whereas conventional hyperimmunisation schedules were used for the equine products. 
Ovine F(ab)2 was produced only on a small scale for this study whereas the equine were 
large scale products. As shown by SDS-PAGE and FPLC, all were at least 95% pure 
with only minor contaminants present. The major protein peaks detected by SDS- 
PAGE also showed as peaks by gel filtration, but minor bands shown by SDS-PAGE 
were not visible by gel filtration. 
Small scale affinity purification showed that the proportion of antibodies present in the 
equine antivenoms and directed against W. aegyptia venom components was relatively 
small. The universal method used to test effectiveness is the ED50 in mice, and both 
commercial antivenoms were ineffective in this respect although they neutralised 
hyaluronidase activity more efficiently than the ovine fragments. Both equine F(ab)2 
antivenotns also showed only weak neutralisation of PLA2, indirect haemolytic activity 
and phosphodiesterase activity. Antivenoms raised against W. aegyptia venom are 
known to cross-neutralise with other closely related elapid species. However cross- 
reactivity studies with both commercial equine F(ab)2 products using ELISA and small 
scale affinity chromatography showed very weak binding to W. aegyptia venom. 
CHAPTER VII 
FINAL DISCUSSION 
FINAL DISCUSSION 
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the surrounding areas are inhabited by a number of 
venomous snakes that are of potential danger. Indeed several of the world's most 
lethal snakes are found in this area of the Middle East with the venomous varieties 
being divided into four families: Elapidae, Hydrophidae, Viperidae and Atractaspidae. 
Of the ten venomous species of land snakes found, vipers cause most of the 
snakebites. Thus the sand viper (Cerastes cerastes) is the most frequently observed 
whereas carpet vipers (E. pyramidum and E. coloratus) are responsible for most of the 
bites and deaths. Bitis arietans, the puff-adder, has been described as the greatest 
killer of man (Dowling et al., 1968) while the venoms from the two elapid species 
found in Saudi Arabia (Naja haje arabica and Walterinnesia aegyptia) are extremely 
poisonous due to their neurotoxicity. Finally, venom from the burrowing asps 
(Atractaspis microlepidota andersonii and A. m. engaddensis) are both neurotoxic and 
cardiotoxic. 
There are numbers of deaths attributed to these species annually with rural farmers, 
Bedouin nomads and members of the armed forces being particularly at risk. Thus it is 
unfortunate that the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is one of the least investigated 
countries concerning envenoming by snakes. The information available is sparse and 
fragmentary with a number of single reports (Annobil, 1993; Kingston, 1981) and 
small retrospective studies. As a result, it is not possible to estimate accurately the 
total number of bites and the resultant mortality (Al-Sadoon, 1989). 
The clinical and pharmacological effects that follow envenoming depend primarily on 
the venom's toxicity and the quantity of venom injected. 
Toxicity is related to the 
pharmacological and enzymatic activities of a venom's components and snake venoms 
are complex mixtures of enzymes and various toxins and non-toxins that may 
induce 
both local and systemic effects. Physical, chemical and biological methods were 
established to measure the in vivo and in vitro effects of these venoms and it was 
found 
that while the venoms shared many features, there were also differences. For example, 
all the venoms tested had PLA2 activity with those from E. coloratus, E. pyramidum and 
N. h. arabica being the most active. Elapid venoms generally have low hyaluronidase 
activity but this was not the situation with N. h. arabica venom. C. cerastes venom 
showed even higher HYL activity which may contribute to localised swelling, blistering 
and necrosis. L-amino acid oxidase (L-AAO) is generally thought to be of low toxicity 
but may also contribute to the local damage. Viperid venoms contain many proteolytic 
enzymes (Kocholaty et al., 1971; Iwanaga and Suzuki, 1979; Seegers and Ouyang, 
1979) that cause coagulation, haemorrhage, necrosis and fibrinogenolysis (Tu et al., 
1969; Ewart et al., 1970; Ouyang and Huang 1976) and most of the venoms also 
hydrolysed the two synthetic substrates studied, namely dimethyl casein and L-BAPNA. 
General haemorrhage is one of the characteristic clinical manifestations which follows 
viper envenomation and especially that by Echis species as seen in the present study. 
Both E. coloratus and E. pyramidum venoms also caused local necrosis when injected 
intradermally and defibrination in vivo. Venoms from both Echis species also had 
considerable coagulant activity with that from E. ocellatus venom being the more 
powerful in this respect. Echis species venoms contain proteins that initiate intravascular 
coagulation. 
W. aegyptia venom, unlike cobra and some other elapid venoms, appears to be devoid 
of cardiotoxic components (Lee, 1972) and, in this study, showed marked 
haemorrhagic but only minimal proteolytic activity. The venom did not exhibit 
coagulant, necrotic, defibrinogenating or myotoxic activities. C. cerastes venom also 
showed no coagulant activity and, while B. arietans venom has been reported to have 
either coagulant or anticoagulant properties (Labib et al., 1981; Visser and Chapman, 
1978), in this study the venom did not show any coagulant activity. Snake venoms can 
effect platelets in various ways; for example some venoms induce while others 
inhibit 
platelet aggregation and both these activities may exist in the same venom (Shebuski et 
al., 1989). In this study C. cerastes and B. arietans venoms showed a dose-dependent 
initiation of platelet aggregation. 
The decrease in muscle contraction observed with N h. arabica and W. aegyptia 
venoms, when using the mouse hemidiaphragm preparation, is due to post-synaptic 
neurotoxin(s) blocking nerve conduction and neither venom was myotoxic. Venoms 
from A. microlepidota, W. aegyptia and N. h. arabiac were the most lethal (4- 
89g/mouse), and were much more toxic to mice than the viperid venoms tested. 
Whereas A. microlepidota and W. aegyptia inject only a small amount of venom, N. h. 
arabica injects a large amount, so that death may occur in a few minutes. E. pyramidum, 
E. coloratus, E. ocellatus, C. cerastes and B. arietans venoms all showed similar 
lethality (12-28g/mouse). 
It should be stressed that the in vitro measurement of enzyme and biological activities 
made in this study may not relate to the complex interactions that occur in living tissues. 
Nontheless, the object of this study was to raise improved antivenoms to these venoms 
and, to achieve this, it was important to define some suitable in vitro effects of the 
venoms in order to determine if the antivenom could neutralise them. 
Most clinicians agree that an appropriate antivenom provides the only specific treatment 
available for severe envenoming. Many of the techniques used to produce antivenoms in 
this study differ from conventional methods. The use of the horse for antivenom 
production dates from over a hundred years ago Roux and Martin (1894) and this 
species still remains the animal of choice by most groups. The reason is that the horse is 
docile and, therefore, easy to handle, requires little care and yields a large volume of 
blood. Methods have also been established for purification of equine blood antibodies. 
Nonetheless, there are several important reasons to consider their replacement. 
Horses 
are no longer widely available and are expensive both to purchase and maintain; they 
have a powerful cell-mediated immune response which may result 
in the formation of 
large abscesses at the injection site; administration of equine immunoglobulin 
concentrates or F(ab)2 often causes a Type III immune-complex mediated 
hypersensitivity reaction and, most importantly, many patients have been sensitised to 
horse proteins due to previous exposure and are, therefore, at risk of experiencing a 
potentially life-threatening Type I anaphylactic hypersensitivity reaction if given equine 
antivenom. Unfortunately, a negative skin test does not exclude the latter. 
In the present study sheep were used. Excellent methods have been developed for 
immunising, bleeding and processing ovine serum and sheep are relatively inexpensive 
and widely available in many countries. They may prove more cost-effective than horses 
for large scale antivenom production especially since, as their immune response is 
predominantly humoral, they do not demonstrate the severe local reactions manifested 
by horses when adjuvants are used. The resultant ability to employ adjuvants, such as 
that introduced by Freund, serves to reduce the toxicity of the venom and greatly 
enhances the antibody response by only gradually releasing the venom into the host 
(Christensen 1955; Latifi and Manhouri 1966; Sawai et al., 1972). Thus higher 
circulating levels of specific antibodies usually result. 
Conventional immunisation of horses to produce an antivenom follows a 
hyperimmunsation schedule in which large amounts of venom are given in rapidly 
increasing sequential doses of up to 1200 mg per injection (Russell, 1988). Such 
protocols do not result in maximal or regular increases in serum antibody levels. Thus 
initially, antibody levels rise progressively but this may be followed by a decline in 
titre after further stimulation even with large venom 
doses (Christensen, 1966; 
Bouquet, 1979). In contrast all sheep showed a good antibody response using a low 
venom dose (0.5mg) given at infrequent (monthly) intervals. Increasing the dose up to 
4mg resulted in a further marked improvement in the response to N. h. arabica, B. 
arietans and C. cerastes venoms. 
The effectiveness of an antiserum will depend on the titre and specificity of 
component populations of antibodies and the affinity (strength) with which they 
the many toxic components of the appropriate venom. The total 
immunoglobulin 
fraction of any immune serum will, of necessity, also contain antibodies that are 
directed against molecules other than those present in the venom. These antibodies 
comprise the background complement of immunoglobulins acquired by the animal 
during its lifetime and, as such, are of no therapeutic benefit to the patient. In this 
study sheep antisera contained 25-30g of immunoglobulin per litre, of which about a 
quarter to a third were specific to antigens in the venom. Fortunately the ovine 
antivenoms all contained a broad range of antibody populations directed against most of 
the venom components, as shown by binding assays. Immunoassays are useful for initial 
assessment and for making comparisons of antivenoms. 
In the first years of the century all the antivenoms given comprised unrefined equine 
serum or plasma. Then a salt precipitate was used and later pepsin digestion was 
introduced. In nearly all instances, ammonium sulphate is used to yield an IgG-rich 
fraction. However, use of the sodium salt results in a pellet that is more easily 
reconstituted, contains lower levels of albumin and avoids the addition of potentially 
toxic ammonium ions. While the risk of allergic reactions has been reduced by pepsin 
digestion the resultant F(ab)2 with its two binding sites can form immune complexes 
and there still remains some reluctance to administer antivenoms. Consequently there 
is a need for safer and more efficient products. 
A recent development in immunotherapy is the use of Fab fragments produced 
digesting IgG with the plant enzyme, papain. This enzyme, a thiol protease 
from the 
papaya plant, removes the Fc portion of the IgG molecules to yield two monovalent 
antibody binding sites (Fab). Fab fragments have a number of advantages over 
both IgG 
and F(ab)2. First, they are not associated with type III 
hypersensitvity reactions because 
with only one antigen binding site, they do not form 
immune complexes. Second, 
lacking the Fc region, they do not bind and activate complement or macrophages 
thereby avoiding vasoactive amine release. Third, because of 
its small size, Fab is 
quickly re-distributed from the general circulation into the extracellular 
tissue fluids. 
Venom components in the general circulation are quickly and efficiently 
bound and 
neutralised by current antivenoms but many high molecular weight venom components 
remain at the bite site causing local effects such as oedema, haemorrhage and necrosis. 
Current antivenoms do not resolve these effects well since they fail to reach the bite site 
in large amounts and a Fab antivenom may be more efficient. Many venoms cause 
severe and permanent local damage and the local infiltration of Fab as well as its 
intravenous administration might alleviate these effects and will be the subject of further 
study. Finally Fab, because of its small size, may penetrate more rapidly into the 
neuromuscular junction and hence, reverse neurotoxicity. However, its small size also 
means that Fab is excreted partially via the kidneys which may be a disadvantage if its 
clearance is too rapid. Conversely, antivenom remaining in the body causes a humoral 
immune response and Fab, because of its faster elimination, may have a lower 
incidence of this. 
The ovine Fab antivenoms produced in this study completely neutralised the enzymatic 
activities of the venoms. They were particularly effective in protecting against the 
indirect haemolytic, coagulation, platelet aggregation, haemorrhagic, necrotic and 
defibrinogenating activities of the various venom components. The Fab antivenoms 
were extremely effective at neutralising the overall lethal effects of venoms strongly 
suggesting that Fab populations bind the most toxic venom components. Comparison 
of ovine IgG with the F(ab)2 and Fab fragments showed similar and complete protection 
when using the in vitro assays but IgG was more effective than the antibody 
fragments 
on a weight basis. 
The mono- and polyspecific ovine antivenoms raised against 
E. pyramidum and E. 
coloratus venoms protected mice in ED50 studies and neutralised the in vitro effects of 
the venoms, with the monospecific products being considerably more effective. 
Monospecific antivenoms should be raised to produce antibodies 
directed against each 
of the different venoms and these can then, at a later stage, 
be mixed to give a 
polyspecific product suitable to treat envenomings by any of the various snakes 
found in 
a particular location. It was of considerable interest that the monospecific 
E. pyramidum 
antivenom provided good neutralisation of many of the enzymatic activities of 
Nigerian 
E. ocellatus venom but did not protect against its potent coagulant activity. The 
antigenic differences in E. pyramidum venom obtained from snakes in different parts 
of the enormous geographical areas where they are found may explain the variable 
potency of particular Echis antivenoms and emphasises the importance of immunising 
with venom from the species of snake collected from the locations for which the 
antivenom is intended. 
Comparison of the ovine Fab and the commercial antivenoms used in Saudi Arabia 
showed the former to be more effective. The commercial equine F(ab)2 products showed 
partial neutralisation of the enzymatic and biological effects of the venoms used in this 
study and completely neutralised their coagulant and indirect haemolytic activities. Both 
also protected against the haemorrhagic activity of E. pyramidum venom when sufficient 
amounts of antivenom were used. Behringwerke showed better protection in mice than 
the Pasteur antivenom for most of the venoms tested but neither provided protection 
against W. aegyptia venom. 
Many quality control criteria must be satisfied when producing effective and safe 
antivenoms. Firstly, venoms are complex biological secretions with large variations in 
composition and the quality of the antivenom depends, in part, on the venom used as 
immunogen. Each venom batch should be tested for lethality and characterised by some 
physical separation and other appropriate method(s). The antivenom should be produced 
under sterile conditions following the strict regulations which are laid down by many 
organisations such as FDA in the USA and the Medicines Control Agency (MCA) in the 
UK. The antivenom should be produced in a controlled, fully validated, optimised and 
well equipped environment. Specially trained and highly qualified staff are required to 
adhere to Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) with all procedures optimised and 
documentated in suitable Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). The product should 
be tested to ensure quality, safety and efficacy using suitable quality control techniques. 
The product must also be free from microbes (as shown by suitable microbiological 
tests) and pyrogens (as shown using both LAL and the rabbit pyrogen test). 
Purity of 
the product can be assessed by FPLC, HPLC, SDS-PAGE and immunoelectrophoresis. 
Ion exchange chromatography and, finally, affinity chromatography should be used to 
remove all contaminating serum proteins and chemicals used in the processing to 
minimise the amount of foreign protein required and to reduce the risk of anaphylactic 
reactions. Efficacy of the final product is traditionally tested using ED50 but hopefully, 
in the future, in vitro assays may reduce such testing in mice. 
To conclude, the antivenoms produced against Saudi Arabian snake venoms in sheep 
demonstrated good protection and compared favourably with currently available 
commercial antivenoms. No specific antivenom has previous been produced against 
Saudi Arabian W. aegyptia, E. coloratus, N. h. arabica and A. microlepidota. The 
monospecific antivenoms were more efficient than a polyspecific antivenom and the 
purified antivenoms could be combined to form mixed monospecific products. The only 
truly realistic assessment of these antivenoms, however, is to perform a properly 
controlled clinical trial in Saudi Arabia. 
REFERENCES 
Abdalla, S., Bilto, Y. and Disi, A. (1992). Effects of sand viper (Cerastes cerastes) 
venom on isolated smooth muscle and heart and on haematological and cardiovascular 
parameters in the guinea-pig. Toxicon, 30,1247-1255. 
Adams, F. (1846). The seven books of Paulus Aegineta. Sydenham Society, London. 
Al-Abdulla, I. H., Sidki, A. M. and Landon, J. (1991). An indirect haemolytic assay 
for assessing antivenoms. Toxicon, 29,1043-1046. 
Alkan, M. L. and Sukenik, S. (1975). Atrioventricular block in a case of snake bite 
inflicted by Atractaspis engaddensis (Letter to editor). Trans. Roy. Trop. Med. Hyg., 69, 
Al-Sadoon, M. K. (1989). Survey of the reptilian fauna of the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia. The snake fauna of the central region. J. King Saud University Science, 1,53- 
Al-Sadoon, M. K. and Farraj, S. A. (1992). Venomous snakes in Saudi Arabia. Al- 
Resalah Press, pp 18-50. 
Annobil, S. H. (1993). Complications of Echis coloratus snake bites in the Asir region 
of Saudi Arabia. Ann. Trop. Paed., 13,39-44. 
Arid, S. D. and Kaiser, I. I. (1985). Comparative studies on the rattlesnake toxins. 
Toxicon, 23,361-3 74. 
Baxter, E. H. and Gallichio, H. A. (1974). Cross-neutralisation by tiger snake 
(Notechis scutatus) antivenene and sea snake (Enhydrina schistoasa) antivenene 
against several sea snake venoms. Toxicon, 12,223-229. 
Ballario, P., Bergami, M. and Pedone, F. (1977). A simple method for purification of 
phosphodiesterase from Vipera aspis venom. Anal. Biochem., 80,646-651. 
von Behring, E. A. and Kitasato, S. (1890). 
ber das zustande-kommen der diptherie- 
immuitt und der tetanus-Immunitt bei thieren. Dtsch. Med. Wschr 16,1113-1114. 
Boche, R. D. and Russell, F. E. (1968). Passive hemagglutination studies with snake 
venom and antivenin. Toxicon, 6,125-130. 
Bouquet, P. (1968). Snakes of Europe and Mediterranean. In: Venomous animals and 
their venoms. Bucherl, W., Buckley, E. E. and Deulofeu, V. (Eds), New York 
Academic Press, 1, pp327-336. 
Bouquet, P. (1979). Immunological properties of snake venoms. In: Snake venoms. 
Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology. Lee C-Y, (Ed), Berlin Springer Verlag, 52, 
pp751-824. 
Branch, W. R. (1981). Venom yields from three species of side-biting snakes (genus 
Atractaspis, Colubridae). Toxicon, 19,271-277. 
Brazil, 0. V. (1966). Pharmacology of crystalline crotoxin. Neuromuscular blocking 
action. Mem. Inst. Butantan, 33,981-992. 
Broadley, D. G. (1968). The venomous snakes of Central and South Africa. In: 
Venomous animals and their venoms. Bucherl, W., Buckley, E. E. and Deulofeu, V. 
(Eds), New York Academic Press, 1, pp403. 
Broadley, D. G. (1983). FitzSimons' Snakes of Southern Africa. Johannesburg, Delta 
Books, pp376. 
Btilbring, E. (1946). Observation on the isolated phrenic nerve diaphragm preparation 
of the rat. Br. J. Pharmacol., 1,38-61. 
Burnet, F. N. (1959). The clonal selection theory of acquired immunity. The Abraham 
Flexner lectures of Vanderbilt, University Press, Nashville Ten, pp 209. 
Calmette, L. C. A. (1894a). Contribution  1'etude du venin des serpents 
(immunisation des animaux et traitement de 1'envenimation). Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 8, 
275-291. 
Calmette, L. C. A (1894b). Proprieties du serum des animaux immunises contre le 
venin des serpents, et therapeutique de Penvenimation. C. R. Acad., 68,720-725. 
Calmette, L. C. A (1895). Contribution a 1'etude des venins, des toxins et des serums 
antitoxiques. Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 9,225-251. 
Calmette, L. C. A. (1896). Le venin des serpents. Physiologie de l' envenimation, 
traitement des morsures venimeuses par le serum des animaux vaccines, Paris, Societe 
d' Editions Scientifiques. 
Calmette, L. C. A (1898). Sur la mechanism de 1'immunisation contre les venins. Ann. 
Inst. Pasteur, 12,343-353 
Canzaini, G., Seki, C. and Vidal, J. C. (1982). Accessibility of the active site of 
crotoxin B in the crotoxin complex. Toxicon, 20,809-822. 
Chang, C. C., Lee, J. D., Eaker, D. and Fohlman, J. (1977). The presynaptic 
neuromuscular blocking action of taipoxin. A comparison with -bungarotoxin and 
crotoxin. Toxicon, 15,571-576. 
Chapman, D. S. ( 1968). The symptomatology, pathology and treatment of the bites of 
venomous snakes of the central and Southern Africa. In: Venomous animals and their 
venoms. Bcherl, W. Buckley and E. and Deuloufe, V. (Eds), New York Academic 
Press, I, pp463-527. 
Cherlin, V. A. (1990). Taxonomic revision of the snake genus Echis (Viperidae). An 
analysis of taxonomy and description of new forms. USSR Acad. Sci. Proc. 
Zool. Inst., 
207,193-223. 
Cheymol, J., Boquet, P., Bourillet, F., Detrait, J. and Roch-Arveiller, M. (1973). 
Comparison of the principal pharmacologic properties of 
different venoms of Echis 
carinatus (Viperides). Arch. Int. Pharmacodyn. Ther., 205,293-304. 
Christensen, P. A. (1955). South African snake venoms and antivenoms. South African 
Institute for Medical Research, Johannesburg, pp52-57. 
Christensen, P. A. (1966). The preparation and purification of antivenoms. 
Mems. Inst. 
Butantan Simp. Intern., 33,245-250. 
Cohen, P. and Seligmann, J. E. (1966). Immunologic studies of coral snake venom. 
Mem. Inst. Butantan Simp. Intern., 33,339- 347. 
Coppola, M. C. and Hogan, D. H. (1992). Venomous snakes of Southwest Asia. Am. 
J. Emer. Med., 10,230-236. 
Coulter, A. R., Sutherland, S. K. and Broad, A. J. (1974). Assay of snake venoms in 
tissue fluids. J. Immun. Meth., 4,297-300. 
Coulter, A. R., Cox, J. C., Sutherland, S. K. and Waddel, C. J. (1978). A new solid- 
phase sandwich radioimmunoassay and its application to the detection of snake venom. 
J. Immun. Meth., 23,241-252. 
Denson, K. W. E. (1969). Coagulant and anticoagulant action of snake venoms. 
Toxicon, 7,5-11. 
Di Ferrante, N. (1956). Turbimetric measurement of acid mucopolysaccharides and 
hyaluronidase activity. J. Biol. Chem., 220,303-306. 
Dowling, H. G., Minton, S. A. and Russell, F. E. (1968). In: Poisonous snakes of the 
world. Washington D. C., U. S. Government Printing Office. 
Dufton, M. J. and Hider, R. C. (1983). Conformational properties of the neurotoxins and 
cytotoxins isolated from elapid snake venoms. Crit. Rev. Biochem., 14,113-171. 
Eagle, H. (1937). The coagulation of blood by snake venoms and its physiological 
significance. J. Exp. Med., 65,613 - 639. 
El-Asmar, M. F., Shaban, E., Hagag, M., Swelam, N. and Tu, A. (1986). Coagulant 
component in Cerastes cerastes (Egyptian sand viper) venom. Toxicon, 24,1037-1044. 
Ewart, M. R., Hatton, M. W. C., Basford, J. M. and Dodgson, K. S. (1970). The 
proteolytic action of Arvin on human fibrinogen. Biochem. J., 118,603-609. 
Fainaru, M., Eisenberg, S., Manny, N. and Hershko, C. (1974). The natural course of 
defibrination syndrome caused by Echis coloratus venom in man. Thromb. Diathes. 
Haemorrh., 31,420-428. 
Farid, T. M., Tu, A. T. and El-Asmar, M. F. (1990). Effect of Cerastobin, a thrombin- 
like enzyme from Cerastes vipera (Egyptian sand snake) venom, on human platelets. 
Haemostasis, 20,296-304. 
Fernandes, I., Takehara, H. A. and Mota, I. (1991). Isolation of IgGT from hyperimmune 
horse anti-snake venom serum: Its protective ability. Toxicon, 29,1373-1379. 
Ferrone, S., Temponi, M., Gargiulo, D., Scassellati, G. A., Cavaliere, R. and Natali, P. G. 
(1988). Selection and utilization of monoclonal antibody defined melanoma associated 
antigens for immunoscintigraphy in patients with melanoma. In: Radiolabeled 
monoclonal antibodies for imaging and therapy. Srivastava, S. C. (Ed), Plenum 
Publishing Corp., New York, ppl-18. 
Finney, D. J. (1971). Probit analysis, 3rd Edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Fraser, T. R. (1895). The rendering of animals immune against the venom of cobra 
and other serpents; and on the antidotal properties of the blood serum of the 
immunised animals. Brit, med. J., 1,1309-1312. 
Gan, Z. R., Gould, R. J., Jacobs, J. W., Friedman, P. A. and Polokoff, M. A. (1988). 
Echistatin: A potent platelet aggregation inhibitor from the venom of the viper, Echis 
carinatus. J. Biol. Chem., 263,19827-19832. 
Gasperetti, J. (1977). Snakes in Arabia. J. Saudi Nat. Hist. Soc., 19,3-16. 
Gasperetti, J. (1988). Snakes of Ar abia. In: Fauna of Saudi Arabia. Buttiker, W. and 
Krupp, F. (Eds), NCWCD, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 9, pp169-392. 
Gene, J. A., Gomez, M., Gutierrez, J. M. and Cerdas, L. (1985). Neutralisation of 
hyaluronidase and indirect haemolytic activity of Costa Rican snake venoms by a 
polyvalent antivenom. Toxicon, 23,1015-1018. 
Gitter, S., Moroz-Perlmutter, C., Boss, J. H., Livni, E., Rechnic, J., Goldum, N., and 
de Vries, A. (1962). Studies on the snake venoms of the Near-East Walterinnesia 
aegyptia and Pseudocerastesfieldii. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 11,861-868. 
Gitter, S., Levi, G., Kochwa, S., DeVries, A., Rechnic, J. and Casper, J. (1960). Studies 
on the venom of Echis coloratus. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 9,391-399. 
Glenn, J. L. and Straight, R. C. ( 1982). The rattlesnakes and their venom yield and lethal toxicity. In: Rattle snake venoms. Their actions and treatment. Tu, A. T. (Ed), 
Marcel Dekker Inc, New York, pp261-273. 
Grabar, P. and Williams, C. A. (1953). Methods permettant I'etude conjugee des 
proprietes electrophoretiques et immunochimiques d'un melange de proteins. 
Application au serum sanguin. Biochem. Biophys. Acta., 10,193-194. 
Greenwood, B. M., Warrell, D. A., Davidson, N. McD., Ormerod, L. D. and Reid, H. A. 
(1974). Immunodiagnosis of snake bite. Br. med. J., 4,743-745. 
Hassan, F. and El-Hawary, M. F. (1975). Immunological properties of antivenoms. I. 
Bivalent Cerastes cerastes and Cerastes vipera antivenin. Amer. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 
24,1031-1034. 
Hassan, F. and Seddik S. (1980). Comparative studies on Egyptian elapid venoms. Z. 
Ernahrungswiss., 19,266-271. 
Houssay, B. A. (1930). Classification des action des venins de serpents sur 
I'organisme animal. Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol., 105,308-310. 
Huang, T. F., Wang, W. J., Teng, C. M., Liu, C. S. and Ouyang, C. (1991). 
Purification and characterisation of an antiplatelet peptide, arietin, from Bitfis arietans. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta., 1074,136-143. 
Jimenez-Porras, J. M. (1970). Biochemistry of snake venoms. Clin. Toxicol., 3,389- 
Johnson, E. K., Kardong, K. V. and Ownby, C. L. (1987). Observations on white and 
yellow venoms from individual Southern Pacific rattlesnake (Crotalus viridis helleri). 
Toxicon, 25,1169-1180. 
Iddon, D., Theakston, R. D. G. and Rommel, M. (1985). A monoclonal antibody 
active against the "haemorrhagin" of Nigerian Echis carinatus venom. Toxicon, 23, 
Iwanaga, S. and Suzuki, T. (1979). Enzymes in snake venom. In: Handbook of 
Experimental Pharmacology. Snake venoms. Lee, C-Y., (Ed), Berlin Springer-Verlag, 
52, pp61-158. 
Kamiguti, A. S., Theakston, R. D. and Tomy, S. C. (1988). An investigation of the 
coagulant activity of the venom of the saw-scaled viper (Echis pyramidum) from 
Saudi Arabia. Ann. Trop. Med. Parasitol., 82,503-509. 
Kemparaju, K., Prasad, B. N. and Gowda, V. T. (1994). Purification of a basic 
phospholipase A2 from Indian saw-scaled viper (Echis carinatus) venom: 
Characterisation of antigenic, catalytic and pharmacological properties. Toxicon, 32, 
1187-1196. 
Kingston, M. E. (1981). Management of snake bite in Saudi Arabia. King Faisal 
Specialist Hospital Medical Journal, 1,87-94. 
Kini, R. M. and Evans, H. J. (1989). A model to explain the pharmacological effects 
of snake venom phospholipase A2. Toxicon, 27,613-635. 
Kirkpatrick, C. H. (1991). Allergic histories and reactions of patients treated with 
digoxin immune Fab (ovine) antibody. Am. J. Emerg. Med., 9,7-10. 
Kocholaty, W. F., Bowles-Ledford, E., Daly, J. G. and Billings, T. A. (1971). 
Preparation of coral snake antivenom from goat serum. Toxicon, 9,297-298. 
Kochva, E. (1987). The origin of snakes and evolution of the venom apparatus. 
Toxicon, 25,65-106. 
Kochva, E., Viljoen, C. C. and Botes, D. P. (1982). A new type of toxin in the venom 
of the snakes of the genus Atractaspis (Atractaspididinae). Toxicon, 20,581-592. 
Khler, G. and Milstein, C. (1975). Continous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody 
of predefined specificity. Nature, 256,495-497. 
Kornalik, F. and Pudlak, P. (1971). Prolonged defibrination caused 
by Echis 
carinatus venom. Life Sci., 10,309-314. 
Komalik, F. and Taborska, E. (1973). Individual interspecies variability in the 
composition of some Viperidae venoms. In: Animal and plant toxins. Kaiser, E., (Ed. ), 
Goldmann, Munchen, pp99-103. 
Kornalik, F. and Blomback, B. (1975). Prothrombin activation induced by Ecarin -a 
prothrombin converting enzyme from Echis carinatus venom. Thromb. Res., 6,57-63. 
Kornalik, F. and Taborska, E. (1989). Cross reactivity of mono- and polyvalent 
antivenoms with Viperidae and Crotalidae snake venoms. Toxicon, 27,1135-1142. 
Labib, R. S., Azab, M. H. and Farag, N. W. (1981). Effects of Cerastes cerastes 
(Egyptian sand viper) and Cerastes vipera (Sahara sand viper) snake venom on blood 
coagulation: Separation of coagulant and anticoagulant factors and their correlation 
with arginine esterase and protease activities. Toxicon, 19,85-94. 
Laemmli, U. K. (1970). Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the 
head of bactriophage T4. Nature, 227,680-685. 
Laing, G. D., Lee, L., Smith, D. C., Landon, L. and Theakston, R. D. G. (1995). 
Experimental assessment of a new, low-cost antivenom for treatment of carpet viper 
(Echis ocellatus) envenoming. Toxicon, 33,307- 313. 
Latifi, M. (1973). Studies of the venom of Iranian Echis carinatus in comparison with 
those of Pakistan and Eritrea. Proc. 9th Int. Cong. Tropical Medicine and Malaria, 
Athens, 14-21. Abstract 107. 
Latifi, M. (1978). Commercial production of anti-snakebite serum (antivenin). In: 
Biology of the reptilia. Gans, C. and Gans, K. A. (Eds), Academic Press, London, 8, pp 
561-588. 
Latifi, M. and Manhouri, H. (1966). Antivenin production. Mems. Inst. Butantan., 33, 
893-897. 
Lee, C. Y. (1971). Mode of action of cobra venom and its purified toxins. 
Neuropoisons. Simpson, L. L. (Ed), Plenum Press, New York, 1, pp 21-70. 
Lee, C. Y. (1972). Chemistry and pharmacology of polypeptide toxins in snake 
venoms. Ann. Rev. Pharmacol., 12,265-286. 
Lee C. Y. and Tasi M. C. (1972). Does the desert black snake venom inhibit release of 
acetylcholine from motor nerve endings? Toxicon, 10,659-660. 
Lee, C. Y., Chen Y. M. and Mebs, D. (1976) Chromatographic separation of the 
venom of Egyptian black snake ( Walterinnesia aegyptia) and pharmacological 
characterisation of its components. Toxicon, 14,275-281. 
Lee, S. Y., Lee, C. Y. and Chen, Y. M. (1989). Coronary vasospasm as the primary 
cause of death due to the venom of the burrowing asp Atractaspis engaddensis. 
Toxicon, 24,285-291. 
Lin, Y., Means, G. E. and Feeney, R. E. (1969). The action of proteolytic enzymes on 
N, N-dimethyl proteins. J. Biol. Chem., 244,789-793. 
Litchfield, J. T. and Wilcoxon, F. (1949). A simplified method of evaluating dose- 
effect experiments. J Pharm. Eexp. Ther., 96,99-113. 
Lomonte, B., Gutierrez, J. M. and Mata, E. (1985). Isolation from a polyvalent 
antivenom of antibodies to a myotoxin in Bothrops aspen snake venom. 
Toxicon., 23, 
807-813. 
Mann, G. (1978). Echis coloratus bites in Israel: An evaluation of specific antiserum use 
on the basis of 21 cases of snake bite. Toxicol. Eur. Res., 
1,365-370. 
Mebs, D. (1970). A comparative study of enzyme activities in snake venoms. Int. J. 
Biochem., 1,335-342. 
Mehrtens, J. M. (1987). Living snakes of the world. New York, NY, Sterlings. 
Meier, J. and Theakston, R. D. G. (1986). Approximate LD50 determinations of snake 
venoms using eight to ten experimental animals. Toxicon, 
24,395-401. 
Miller, J. P., Hirst-Bruns, M. E. and Philipps, G. R. (1970). Action of venom 
phosphodiesterase on transfer RNA from Escherichia coll. Biochim. Biophys. 
Acta., 
217,176-188. 
Minton, S. A. (1974). Venom diseases. Charles Thomas (Ed), Springfield, 11, pp136- 
Minton, S. A. and Minton, M. R. (1969). Venomous reptiles. George Allen and Unwin, 
London, pp212. 
Minton, S. A. and Minton, M. R. (1988). Snakes of Arabia. In: Fauna of Saudi Arabia. 
Buttiker, W. and Krupp, F. (Eds), NCWCD, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. 9, pp 169-392. 
Mohammed, A. H., Bakr, I. A. and Kamal, A. (1966). Egyptian polyvalent anti-snake- 
bite serum: Technique of preparation. Toxicon, 4,69-72. 
Mohammed, A. H., Darwish, M. A. and Hani-Ayobe, M. (1973). Immunological 
studies on Egyptian polyvalent antivenoms. Toxicon, 11,457-460. 
Mohammed, A. H., Abdel-baset, A. and Amr, H. (1980). Immunological studies on 
monovalent and bivalent Cerastes antivenom. Toxicon, 18,384-387. 
Naphade, R. W. and Shetti, R. N. (1977). Use of neostigmine after snakebite. Br. J. 
Anaesth., 49,1065-1068. 
Nathan, I., Dvilansky, A., Yirmiyahu, T., Aharon, M. and Livne, A. (1982). Impairment 
of platelet aggregation by Echis coloratus venom mediated by L-amino acid oxidase on 
H202 Throm. Haem., 48,277-282. 
New, R. R. C., Theakston, R. D. G., Zumbuehl, 0., Iddon, D. and Friend, J. (1985). 
Liposomal immunisation against snake venoms. Toxicon, 23,215-219. 
Ouyang, C. and Teng, C. M. (1972). Purification and properties of the anticoagulant 
principle of Agkistrodon acutus venom. Biochem. Biophys. Acta., 278,155-162. 
Ouyang, C. and Huang, T. F. (1976). The purification and characterisation of the 
fibrinolytic principle of Agkistrodon acutus venom. Biochem. Biophys. Acta., 439,146- 
Ouyang, C., Teng, C. M., Chen, Y. C. and Lin, S. C. (1978). Purification and 
characterisation of the anticoagulant principle of Trimersurus mucrosquamatus venom. 
Biochem. Biophys. Acta., 541,394-407. 
Ovadia, M. (1987). Isolation and characterisation of haemorrhagic factor from the 
venom of the snake Atractaspis engaddensis. Toxicon, 25,621-630. 
Ovadia, M. and Kochva, E. (1977). Neutralisation of Viperidae and Elapidae snake 
venoms by sera of different animals. Toxicon, 15,541-547. 
Pasteur, L. (1985). Pasteur and immunisation with living attenuated cultures (rabies). 
In: A history of immunisation. Parish, H. J. (Ed), Livingstone, E., pp452-60. 
Perez, J. C., Garcia, V. E. and Hnang, S. Y. (1984). Production of a monoclonal 
antibody against the haemorrhagic activity of Crotalus atrox (western diamondback 
rattlesnake) venom. Toxicon, 22,967-973. 
Petkovic, D., Pavlovic, M., Jovanovic, T., Panic-Drzajic, V., Zdjelar, K., Unkovik, S., 
Matejevic, D., Alekisic, N. and Cvetkovic, M. (1991). Neutralization of the activity of 
Vipera ammodytes ammodytes snake venom on myocardium of rats by antitoxinum 
viperinum: A histopathological study. J. Tox. Clin. Exp., 11,343-347. 
Phillips L. L., Weiss, H. J., Pressar, L. and Christy, N. P. (1973). Effects of puff adder 
venom on the coagulation mechanism. I. In vivo. Toxicon, 11,423-431. 
Pope, C. G. (1939). The action of proteolytic enzymes on the antitoxins and proteins in 
immune sera. True digestion of the proteins. Br. J. Exp. Path., 20,132-149. 
Porter, R. R. (1959). The hydrolysis of rabbit gamma-globulin and antibodies with 
crystalline papain. Biochem. J., 73,119-126. 
Rechnic, J., Trachtenberg, P., Casper, J., Moroz, C. and De Vries, A. (1962). 
Afibrinogenemia and thrombocytopenia in guinea pigs following injection of Echis 
coloratus venom. Blood, 20,735-749. 
Reed, L. H. and Muench, H. (1938). A simple method of estimating 50 percent endpoint. 
Am. J. Hyg., 27,493-504. 
Reid, H. A. (1967). Defibrination by Agkistrodon Rhodostoma venom. Animal toxins 
(the First International Symposium on Animal Toxins. Pergamon Press. Oxford and 
New York, pp323-335. 
Reid, H. A. (1972). Snake bite. Part 1. Clinical features snakebite. Part 2. Treatment. 
Trop. Doc., 2,155-163. 
Reid, H. A. (1979). Symptomatology, pathology and treatment of the bites of sea snakes. 
Snake venoms. In: Handbook of experimental pharmacology. Lee C-Y, (Ed), Berlin 
Springer-Verlag, 52, pp922-977. 
Reid, H. A. and Theakston, R. D. G. (1983). The management of snake bite. Bull. WHO, 
61,885-895. 
Reid, H. A. (1988). Treatment of venomous snakebite. In: Fauna of Saudi Arabia. 
Buttiker, W. and Krupp, F. (Eds), , 
NCWCD, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia., 9, pp393-399. 
Romer, A. S. (1947). In: Vertebrate Palaeontology, University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago. 
Rosenberg, P. (1979). Pharmacology of phospholipase A2 from snake venoms. In: 
Handbook of experimental pharmacology, Lee, C-Y., (Ed), Springer Verlag, New York, 
52, pp403-447. 
Roux, M. E. and Martin, M. L. (1894). Contribution A I'etude de la diphterique. Ann. 
Inst. Pasteure Lille, 8,639-661. 
Russell, F. E. (1963). Venomous animals and their toxins. Times science review. 
London. 
Russell, F. E. (1967). Gel diffusion study on human sera following rattlesnake venom 
poisoning. Toxicon, 5,147-148. 
Russell, F. E. (1983). Snake Venom Poisoning. Scholium International, Great Neck, 
New York. 
Russell, F. E. (1988). Venom immunology: Historical and practical considerations. J. 
Toxicol., 7,1-82. 
Russell, F. E. (1991). Venomous snakes of the Middle East. Vet. Hum. Toxicol., 33,68. 
Russell, F. E., Timmerman, W. F. and Meadows, P. (1970). Clinical use of antivenin 
prepared from goat serum. Toxicon, 8,63-65. 
Russell, F. E. and Wainschel, J. (1973). Snakebite. In: Current pediatric therapy. Gellis, 
S. S. and Kagon, B. M., (Ed), W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia pp751. 
Russell, F. E., Sullivan, J. B., Egan, N. B., Markland, F. S., Wingert, W. A. and Bar-Or, 
De (1985). Preparation of new antivenom by affinity chromatography. Am. J Trop. 
Med. Hyg., 60,797-810. 
Sawai, Y., Chinzei, H. Kawamura, Y., Fukuyama, T. and Okonogi, T. (1972). Studies on 
the improvement of treatment of Habu (Trimeresurus flavoviridis) bites. IX. Studies on 
the immunogenicity of the purified Habu venom toxoid by alcohol precipitation. Jpn. J. 
Exp. Med., 42,155-164. 
Seegers, W. H. and Ouyang, C. (1979). Snake venoms and blood coagulation. In: Hand 
book of experimental pharmacology. Lee, C. Y., (Ed. ), Springer Verlag, Berlin. 52, 
pp684-750. 
Sekoguchi, S., Nikai, T. and Suzuki, Y. (1986). Kinin-releasing enzyme from the venom 
of Bitfis arietans (puff adder). Biochim. Biophys. Acta., 884,502-509. 
Sells, P. G., Jones, R. G. A., Laing, G. D., Smith, D. C. and Theakston, R. D. G. (1994). 
Experimental evaluation of ovine antisera to Thai cobra (Naja kaouthia) venom and a- 
neurotoxin. Toxicon, 32,1657-1665. 
Sewall, H. (1887). Experiments on the preventive innoculation of rattlesnake venom. 
J. Physiol., 8,203 -210. 
Shebuski, R. J., Ramjit, D. R., Bencen, G. H. and Polokoff, M. A. (1989). 
Characterisation and platelet inhibitory activity of bitistatin, a potent arginine-glycine- 
aspartic acid-containing peptide from the venom of Bitfis arietans. J. Biol. 
Chem., 264, 
21550-21556. 
Shebuski, R. J., Ramjit, D. R., Sitko, G. R., Lumma, P. K. and Garsky, V. M. (1990). 
Prevention of canine coronary artery thrombosis with echistatin, a potent 
inhibitor of 
platelet aggregation from the venom of the viper, Echis carinatus. Throm. 
Haem., 64, 
576-581. 
Sjostrom, L., Al-Abdullah, I. H., Rawat, S., Smith, D. C. and Landon, J. (1994). A 
comparison of ovine and equine antivenoms. Toxicon, 32,427-433. 
Slotta, K. H. and Fraenkel-Conrat, H. L. (1938). Two active proteins from rattlesnake 
venom. Nature, 142,213. 
Smith, D. S., A1-Hakiem, M. H. and Landon, J. (1981). A review of fluoroimmunoassay 
and immunofluorometric assay. Ann. Clin. Biochem., 18,253-274. 
Smith, T. W., Lloyd, B. L., Spicer, N. and Haber, E. (1979). Immunogenicity and 
kinetics of distribution and elimination of sheep digoxin-specific IgG and Fab fragments 
in the rabbit and baboon. Clin. Exp. Immun., 36,384-396. 
Smith, D. C., Reddi, K. R., Laing, G., Theakston, R. D. G. and Landon, J. (1992). An 
affinity purified ovine antivenom for the treatment of Vipera berus envenoming. 
Toxicon, 30,865-871. 
Soslau, G., EI-Asmar, M. F. and Parker, J. (1988). Cerastes cerastes (Egyptian sand 
viper) venom induced platelet aggregation as compared to other agonists. Biochem. 
Biophys. Res. Commun., 150,909-916. 
Sugino, Y. (1957). Studies on deoxynucleosidic compounds. II. Deoxycytidine 
diphosphate choline in sea urchin eggs. Biochim. Biophys. Acta., 40,425-434. 
Sullivan, J. B. (1987). Past, present, and future immunotherapy of snake venom 
poisoning. Ann. Emerg. Med., 16,938-943. 
Sutherland, S. K., Coulter, A. R., Broad, A. J., Hilton, J. M. N. and Lane, L. H. D. 
(1975). Human snake bite victims: The successful detection of circulating snake venom 
by radioimmunoassay. Med. J. Aust. 1,27-29. 
Sutherland, S. K. and Coulter, A. R. (1977a). Three instructive cases of tiger snake 
(Notechis scutatus) envenomation and how RIA proved the diagnosis. Med. J. Aust., 2, 
177-180. 
Sutherland, S. K. and Coulter, A. R. (1977b). Snakebite detection of venom by 
radioimmunoassay. Med. J. Aust., 2,683-684. 
Sutherland, S. K., Coulter, A. R., Harris, R. D., Lovering, K. E. and Roberts, I. D. 
(1981). A study of the major Australian snake venoms in the monkey (Macaca 
fascicularis). I. The movement of injected venom, methods which retard this movement, 
and the response to antivenoms. Pathology, 13,13-27. 
Suzuki, T., Iwanaga, S. and Nitta, K. (1960). Studies on snake venom. XI. On the 
hydrolysis of cyclic mononucleotides by snake venom. J. Pharm. Soc. Jpn., 80,1040- 
1044. 
Takahashi, W. Y. and Tu, A. T. (1970). Puff adder snake bite. J. Am. Med. Ass., 211, 
1857. 
Tan, N. H. and Ponnudurai, G. (1990) A comparative study of the biological 
properties of venoms from snakes of the genus Vipera (true adders). Comp. Biochem. 
Physiol., 9,683-688. 
Teng, C. M. and Seegers, W. H. (1981). Agkistrodon acutus snake venom 
inhibits 
prothrombinase complex formation. Thromb. Res., 23,255-263. 
Tervan, J. W. (1927). The error of determination of toxicity. Proc. R. Soc., 101B, 483. 
Theakston, R. D. G. (1983). The application of immunoassay techniques including 
enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) to snake venom research. Toxicon, 21,341-352. 
Theakston, R. D. G., Lloyd-Jones, M. J., and Reid, H. A. (1977). Micro-ELISA for 
detecting and assaying snake venom and venom antibody. 
Lancet, 2,639-641. 
Theakston, R. D. G. and Reid, H. A. (1979). 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) in assessing antivenom potency. Toxicon, 17,511-515. 
Theakston, R. D. G., Reid, H. A. and Iddon, D. (1982). Standardization tests 
estimation of defibrinating, coagulant, haemorrhagic and necrotizing effects of snake 
venom. Toxicon, 20,363. 
Theakston, R. D. G. and Reid, H. A. (1983). Development of simple standard assay 
procedures for the characterisation of snake venoms. Bull. WHO., 
61,949-956. 
Theakston, R. D. G. and Smith, D. C. (1995). Therapeutic antibodies to snake venoms. In: Therapeutic antibodies. Landon, J and Chard, T. (Eds), Springer-Verlag, pp109-151. 
Theakston, R. D. G. and Warrell, D. A. (1991). Antivenoms: A list of hyperimmune sera 
currently available for the treatment of envenoming by bites and stings. Toxicon, 29, 
1419-1470. 
Towbin, H., Staenhelin, T. and Gordon, J. (1979). Electrophoretic transfer of proteins 
from polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose sheets; procedure and some applications. 
Pro. Natl. Acad. Sci., 76,4350-4354. 
Tu, A. T., Homma, M. and Hong, B. S. (1969). Haemorrhagic, myonecrotic, 
thrombotic and proteolytic activities of viper venoms. Toxicon, 6,175-178. 
Tu, A. T. (1982). Chemistry of rattlesnake venoms. In: Rattlesnake venoms, their 
action and treatment. A. T. Tu (Ed), Marcel Dekker, Inc. New York, pp247-312. 
Ueda, M., Chang, C. C. and Ohno, M. (1988). Purification and characterisation of L- 
amino acid oxidase from the venom of Trimeresurus mucrosquamatus (Taiwan habu 
snakes). Toxicon, 26,695-706. 
Vidal, J. C. and Stoppani, A. 0. M. (1971). Isolation and purification of two 
phospholipases A from Bothrops venoms. Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 145,543-556. 
Visser, J. and Chapman, D. S. (1978). Snake and snake bite. Venomous snakes and 
management of snake bite in Southern Africa. Purnell, South Africa, pp 152. 
Warrell, D. A. (1993). Venomous bites and stings in Saudi Arabia. Saudi Med. J., 14, 
196-202. 
Warrell, D. A. (1995). Clinical toxicology of snakebite in Africa and the Middle 
East/Arabian Peninsula. Clinical toxicology of animal venoms and poisons. Meier, J. 
and White, J. (Eds), Library of congress-in- Publication Data, U. S. A, pp433-492. 
Warrell, D. A., Davidson, N. McD., Omerod, L. D. and Pope, H. M. (1974). Bites by the 
saw scaled or carpet viper (Echis carinatus). Trial of two specific antivenoms. Br. Med. 
J., 4,437-440. 
Warrell, D. A., Ormerod, L. D. and Davidson, N. McD. (1975). Bites by puff-adder 
(Bitfis arietans) in Nigeria and value of antivenom. Br. Med. J., 4,697-700. 
Warrell, D. A., Barnes, H. J. and Pibum, M. F. (1976). Neurotoxic effects of bites by the 
Egyptian cobra (Naja haje) in Nigeria. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg., 70,78-79. 
Weir, D. M. (1987). Immunochemical analysis of immunoglobulin and their sub-units. 
In: Hand Book of Experimental immunology. pp 6.1- 6.102. 
Weiss, H. J., Phillips, L. L., Hopewell, W. S., Phillips G., Christy N. P. and Nitti R. F. 
(1973). Heparin therapy in a patient bitten by a saw scaled viper (Echis carinatus), a 
snake whose venom activates prothrombin. Am. J. Med., 54,653-662. 
Weiser, E., Wollberg, Z., Kochva, E. and Lee, S. (1984). Cardiotoxic effects of the 
venom of burrowing asp, Atractaspis engadensis (Atractaspidinae, Ophidia). Toxicon, 
22,767-774. 
WHO (1981). Coordinated meeting on venoms and antivenoms. WHOBS/80- 
1292BLG/VEN/80. Rev. I 
Xu, X., Wang, X., Xi, X., Liu, J., Huang, J. and Lu, Z. (1982). Purification and partial 
characterisation of hyaluronidase from five snake (Agkistrodon acutus) venoms. 
Toxicon, 20,973-981. 
Yalow, R. S. and Berson, S. A. (1960). Immunoassay of endogenous plasma 
insulin in 
man. J. Clin. Invest., 39,1157-1175. 
Yan, Z. L., Tie, F. Y. and Lian, C. Y. (1994). Purification and characterisation of 
amino acid oxidase from king cobra (Ophiophagus 
hannah) venom and its effects on 
human platelet aggregation. Toxicon, 32,1349-1358. 
Yatziv, S., Manny, N., Ritchie, J. and Russel, A. (1974). The induction of 
afibrinogenemia by Echis coloratus snake bite. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 77,136-138. 
Zeller, E. A. (1948). Enzymes of snake venoms and their biological significance. 
Enzymol., 8,459-495. 
