THE UNIVERSITY OF BIRMINGHAM 
AN IMMUNOLOGICAL STUDY OF BRAZILIAN SNAKE VENOM ANTIGENS-
TOWARDS A SPECIES-SPECIFIC DIAGNOSTIC ASSAY 
A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED TO 
THE FACULTY OF SCIENCE 
IN CANDIDACY FOR THE DEGREE OF DOCTOR IN PHILOSOPHY 
DEPARTMENT OF IMMUNOLOGY 
LUIZ GUILHERME DIAS HENEINE 
EDGBASTON 
BIRMINGHAM,BI52TT 
JULY, 1994 
SYNOPSIS 
Snakebite by venomous snakes is a serious health problem in many Countries of the world. The 
identification of the offending snake through venom analysis would allow for specific treatment to 
be given minimising mortality and morbidity rates. 
This work focused on developing an immunoassay for the species-specific identification of 
Bothrops and Lachesis venoms. Crossreactivity studies showed that the venoms shared many 
crossreacting epitopes. The use of venom adsorbents yielded antivenoms capable of discriminating 
the homologous venom from heterologous venoms in 'in vitro' tests both in buffer solutions and 
when added to normal human serum In the conditions studied, species-specific venom 
identification was independent of venom concentration and antivenom dilution. Western blot 
analysis, revealed in a venom ')lool" from a single species, components that could be species-
specific markers. These were shown to be present also in venoms from individual snakes of the 
same species from different geographic regions. Immunoaffinity chromatography of the 
B. jararaca venom suggests a partial purification of its species-specific component. 
The work showed the possibility of species-specific identification of Bothropic and Lachetic 
venoms. This identification is obtained through the demonstration of specific venom components. 
The application of this methodology to the clinical identification of snakebites could assist in the 
improvement of treatment of these casualties. 
DEDICATION 
To my wife Anamaria, for her unquestioned love, dedication and companionship. 
To my sons, Felippe and Andre, for their immense love so vividly shown in their beautiful little 
faces and for their intriguingly beautiful innocence that makes my everyday existence a meaningful 
pleasure. 
To my parents, Ibrahim and Berenice, my brothers, Paulo Roberto, Gustavo Henrique, and 
Ricardo Alberto and to my aunt, Berenice (Baixinha) for their constant support. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I am most grateful to my supervisor Dr. David Catty for the support and guidance, always 
pleasant, through the course of this work. 
My most sincere thanks to Mrs. Chandra Raykundalia for her help advice and friendship. For her 
correct, spontaneous, happy and warm character. 
To my colleagues, Mira Varagunam, Sophie Mgan, Aqeel Ahmad and Abdul Karim for their help 
and friendship. 
List of Abbreviations 
2J3-Me = 
2D-IEP= 
A280nm -
B. alt -
B. atr -
B. cot -
B. jar -
B. jsu -
B. moj = 
B. neu = 
BSA -
C.dc. -
C.dt. -
CPM -
DAB -
DEAE= 
dil. -
ELISA = 
FCA -
FCS -
FIA -
HAT -
HRP -
HRPMI= 
IEP -
IgG -
L. mut = 
OPD -
PAGE = 
PBS -
PEG -
PLA2 -
RIA -
RPMI -
SDS -
TCA -
WHO -
2 beta Mercaptoethanol 
Two dimensional immunoelectrophoresis 
Absorbance at 280 nm 
Bothrops alternatus 
Bothrops atrox 
Bothrops cotiara 
Bothrops jararaca 
Bothrops jararacussu 
Bothrops moojeni 
Bothrops neuwiedi 
Bovine Serum Albumin 
Crotalus durissus collineatus 
Crotalus durissus terrificus 
Counts per minute 
3',3' diaminobenzidine 
Di-ethyl amino-ethyl 
dilution 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
Freund's Complete Adjuvant 
Foetal Calf Serum 
Freund's Incomplete Adjuvant 
Hypoxantine-Aminopterin-Thymidine 
Horseradish peroxidase 
Hepes buffered RPMI medium 
Hypoxanthine and Thymidine solution 
Immune complexes 
Immunoelectrophoresis 
Immunoglobulin G 
Lachesis muta 
Molecular Weight 
Optical Density 
ortho-phenylenediamine 
Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis 
Phosphate Buffered Saline 
Polyethylene Glycol 
Phospholipase A2 
Radio-immunoassay 
RPMI-1640 culture medium with L-glutamine 
Sodium dodecyl sulphate 
Tric10racetic acid 
World Health Organisation 
CONTENTS 
3.1.7. 2-0imensional gel immunoelectrophoresis with monovalent rabbit antivenom in the reference gel. 84 
3.1.9.4.1. Adsorption on venom adsorbents containing a mixture of heterologous venoms in equal 
3.1.9.4.3. Absorption of antivenoms in glutaraldehyde venom adsorbents with proportional amounts 
3.1.12. Production of species-specific antivenom using polyacrylamide gel slices containing antigens as 
3.1.13. Cross-reactivity studies with antivenoms absorbed in glutaraldehyde venom adsorbents with 
3.2.2. Identification of the species-specific components on venoms from individual snakes of the same 
6.4.1. Reactivity index for the preparation of the venom adsorbents with proportionally added venoms. 196 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1. General Introduction 
Through science, man is steadily increasing the understanding of himself and his 
environment. In Biology this has led to the prevention, treatment and cure of many human 
diseases. Despite this acquired knowledge, however, there are many problems still to be 
solved. 
Since the Renaissance, the use of scientific obselVations and methods has been applied to 
the study of the pharmacological and chemical characterisation of snake venoms. This has 
brought about a sharp decrease in human mortality following snakebite. 
However, in many countries of the world snakebites still pose a threat to man and are 
regarded by the World Health Organisation as a major health problem This is true for the 
majority of the developing countries, usually distributed within the warmer areas of the 
planet. There, snakes are not only more abundant but also exist in greater variety. The 
generally poor economies of these countries makes the task of providing an efficient health 
care service and specific treatment for snakebite a difficult one. 
The World Health Organisation sees the use of immunodiagnostic methods as a useful 
means of improving the epidemiological data on snakebite. These data should in tum 
provide the necessary knowledge to develop specific treatment strategies such as 
production of species-specific antivenom, or specific supportive treatment where the use of 
antivenoms is not advisable. They would also provide tools to further studies of the 
geographic distribution and genetic variability of snakes. 
1. 1. 1. Relationship between Man and Snakes 
The relationship between man and snakes dates back to pre-historic times and its closeness 
may come as a surprise to many. According to Morris et ai., [1965], no other animal form 
has played such an important or varied role in man's thinking. They have been worshipped, 
and seen as a symbol of procreation, longevity and immortality. They have embodied the 
idea of death, life, temptation, sin, disease and cure. They have been used in medicine, 
religion, commerce and science. 
Venomous snakes have played a major role in this relationship due to their ability to cause 
fatal or serious injuries to man and his livestock. Since the beginning of civilisation different 
ways to counteract the toxic effects of snake venoms have been tried. This gradually 
evolved into a broader and more systematic study of snake venoms, including their 
biochemical characterisation, modes of action, the pharmacologica1, physiological and 
immunological mechanisms, and classification. 
1.2. Snake Classification 
The wide variety of species of snakes that exist, makes the task of organising this diversity 
into a systematic classification a difficult one. The lack of abundant snake fossils forces the 
classification to be based on comparative studies of living species. Most snake taxonomy 
has been based upon external and anatomical features (dentition, skeleton, muscles, etc.). 
Recently, comparative studies using serologica1, biochemical and immunological approaches 
have produced interesting results. Much of this depends on the interpretation of experts. As 
the research tools developed, new evidence and hypotheses arose and previous conclusions 
had to be modified. Thus, changes in the classification occurred, with species becoming 
subspecies and vice-versa. The lack of agreed criteria and frequent disagreement upon 
common interpretation by the experts, significantly affects the total estimated number of 
living snake species. There are between 2,500 to 2,700 species of snakes recognised by the 
specialists [Underwood, 1979]. Snakes are members of the class Reptilia, Order Squamata, 
Suborder Serpentes. A proposed classification of Snakes [Mcdowe11, 1987] is summarised 
below and only the In:fraorder Alethinophidia is detailed. 
Infraorder Cholophidia 
3 Families 
Infraorder Scolecophidia 
3 Families 
Infraorder Alethinophidia 
Superfamily Acrochordoidea 
Family Nigeropheidae 
Family Palaeopheidae 
Family Anomalopheidae 
Family Acrochordidae 
Superfamily Anilioidea 
Family Loxocemidae 
Family Xenopeltidae 
Family Aniliidae 
Family Uropeltidae 
Superfamily Tropidopheoidea 
Family Tropidopheidae 
Superfamily Bolyerioidea 
Family Bolyeriidae 
Superfamily Booidea 
Family Pythonidae 
Family Boidae 
Superfamily Colubroidea 
Series Proteroglypha 
Family Atractaspididae 
Family Elapidae 
Series Opisthoglypha 
Family Colubridae 
Family Viperidae 
The "advanced snakes" are placed in the Superfamily Colubroidea and a characteristic of 
this group, absent in some, is the presence of a venom gland. Certain maxillary teeth deliver 
these secretions (venom) and are often grooved or caniculate. In the Proteroglypha Series, 
specimens from the Family Atractaspididae, and Elapidae have anterior fangs but fixed to 
the maxillary bone. FamilyColubridae is characterized by: solid maxillary teeth anterior to 
fangs (if fangs are present), the fangs with open groove. When venom secretion is present 
(supralabial venom gland) the secretion is carried by fangs on rear of maxilla. The Family 
Colubridae has a world-wide distribution. With aquatic, fossoria~ terrestria~ and arboreal 
forms, it contains two-thirds of all living snakes. The majority of colubrid species are 
believed to be harmless, except when venom gland is present. 
In Table 1.1, the Opisthoglypha Series where the Bothrops genus is placed, is expanded to 
the level of genera. Only some examples of genera are shown. 
Table 1.1: Classification of Snakes in the Onisthoglvoha Series. 
Family Subfamily Genera (relevant examples) 
Pareatinae, Boodontinae, 
Homalospsinae, 
Colubridae Calamariinae, 
Xenoderminae, Natricinae, 
Xenodontinae, Colubrinae, 
Peseudoxenodontinae 
Azemiopinae Azemiops. 
--------
Agkistrodon, Bothrops, 
Crotalus, Lachesis, 
Crotalinae Hypnale, Trimeresurus, 
Viperidae Sistrurus, Calloselasma, 
---------
Viperinae Vipera, Bitis, Causus, 
Echis, etc. 
The genus Bothrops is within the Family Viperidae. Some of the characteristics of this 
Family are: dentition reduced to a pair of fangs with enclosed canal (caniculated) and the 
presence of a thick-walled venom gland in the mouth homologous to that of Proteroglypha 
and Colubridae. The fangs are not fixed and are pointed towards the front of the mouth 
during the strike. The Subfamily Crotalinae, where the Bothrops species are placed, have a 
distinct characteristic; that is a deep loreal (heat sensory) pit lodged in a fossa on the 
prefrontal and maxilla bones. This heat sensory organ is not present in the in specimens of 
the Subfamilies Azemiops and Viperinae. Classification within the Bothrops genus is defined 
mainly by morphological characteristics such as: size, skin colour, colour and scale pattern 
and hemipenes characteristics. The Bothrops species are found from Central America (one 
species, B. asper, ranges through Central America to nonthern Mexico) down to most of 
South America and on the Caribbean islands. In a preliminary account of the Neotropical 
Crotalinae, there were 31 types of Bothrops including species and subspecies in Brazil. The 
species for the genus Bothrops are: B. megaera, B. albocarinatus, B. alternatus, 
B. alticolus, B. ammodytoides, B. andianus, B. atrox, B. asper, B. barbouri, 
B. barnetti, B. bicolor, B. bilineatus bilineatus, B. bilineatus smaragdinus, B. brazili, 
B. castenaldi, B. caribbaeus, B. cotiara, B. dunni, B. erythromelas, B. /onsecai, 
B. god manni, B. hyoprorus, B. iglesiasi, B. in su lares, B. itapetiningae, B. jararaca, 
B. jararacussu, B. lanceolatus, B. lansbergii lansbergii, B. lansbergii annectens, 
B. lansbergii venezuelensis, B. lateralis, B. lichenosus, B. lojanus, B. marajoensis, 
B. medusa, B. melanurus, B. microphthalmus microphthalmus, B. microphthalmus 
colombianus, B. moojeni, B. nasutus, B. neuwiedi neuwiedi, B. neuwiedi bolivianus, 
B. n. meridionalis, B. n. diporus, B. n. paranaensis, B. n. lutzi, B. n. pauloensis, B. n. 
piauhyensis, B. n. pubescens, B. n. urutu, B. nigroviridis nigroviridis, B. nigroviridis 
aurifer, B. nummifer nummifer, B. nummifer mexicanus, B. nummifer occidus, 
B. oligolepsis, B. ophryomegas, B. peruvians, B. picadoi, B. pictus, B. pirajai, B. pradoi, 
B. pulcher, B. punctatus, B. roendingeri, B. sanctaecrucis, B. schilegelli, B. sphenphrys, 
B. supraciliaris, B. undulatus, B. venezuelensis, B. xantogrammus, B. yucatannicus [Hoge, 
1965]. The species in bold are found in Brazil. 
1.3. Geographical Distribution 
Snakes are found in all continents of the earth, excluding only a few regions which are 
entirely free of snakes (Figure 1.1 ) 
'/1lII 
'1..-
~ )J''\-
~:J' ) 
) _ No venomous snakes --t 
.. mmm No snakes 
Figure 1.1 Wodd regions without any snakes and without venomous snakes 
Source: Snakes, Engelmann, Wolf-Eberhard, 1984 
Publisher: Croom Helm Ltd, Kent, UK 
Being ectothermic, snakes are more abundant in the warmer regions where the climate suits 
them. The tropical regions is where they achieve their greatest variety and highest 
population density. In general, only Northern parts of Europe, Asia and North America are 
devoid of snakes The distribution of vipers and pit vipers (which includes the Bothrops 
species) is shown in Figure l.2 
In Brazil the Bothrops genera is found in the whole of the Brazilian territory. Many species 
share the same geographical area. In Fig. l.3 this can be observed, with examples of the 
main species of Bothrops found in Brazil. A more detailed list showing the distribution of 
venomous snakes including the Bothrops species in the various states of Brazil is too long 
to be presented here but is included in Appendix I. 
ill] Pit - vipers (Crotalidae) 
~ Vipers (Viperidae) 
Source: Snakes; Engelmann, Wolf-Eberhard, 1984 
Publisher Croom HeJmJ.,td, Kent, UK 
Figure: 1.2 Distribution of Vipers and Pit-vipers 
~ LXhC$'~ mut. 
~ CrotiJlu:o dUflSSUJ 
North Region (Regiao Norte) B. atrox, B. brazili, B. bilineatus and B. castenauldi 
Central-West Region ( Regiao Centro-Oeste) B. moojeni, B. neuwiedi, B. jarar8C8, B. BitemBfus and B. castena~di 
Northeast Region (NE) NE-1: B. atrox, B. brazili, B. bilineatus and B. castenauldi 
NE-2: B. erytilromelas, B. neuwiedi, B. moojeni and B. jarar8C8. 
NE-3: B. jararaC8, B. jararacussu, B. pradoi, B. leucurus and B. bilineatus 
Southeast Region (Regiao Sudeste) B. jarar8C8, B. Bitematus, B. moojeni, B. neuwiedi, B. jarafacussu, B. pradot 
fonsecai, B. itapetiningae and B. erythromelas 
South Region (Regiao Sui) B. jafafaC8, B. jarafacussu, B. Bitematus, B. neuwiedi and B. cotiafa 
Figure: 1.3 Distribution of venomous snakes in Brazil of the Bothrops, Crotalus and Lachesis genera. 
Observe the overllaping distribution of Bothrops species. 
1.4. Snake Venom Components 
The absence of limbs and of cutting and grinding teeth forced the development of new 
feeding strategies in the evolution of snakes. Venomous snakes immobilise their prey by 
injecting venom It is thought that venoms evolved from digestive enzymes [Meier, 1990]. 
Venoms have been extensively studied and in general their composition is well established in 
many species. They are complex mixtures, containing peptides, polypeptides, enzymes, 
glycoproteins, lipids, biogenic amines, free amino acids and metals. About 95% of the dry 
weight of snake venoms consists of proteins. The non-protein portion of the venom is a 
much smaller amount of material and in general is less biologically active. 
1.4. 1. Non-Protein Components 
These can be divided in two categories, inorganic and organic. 
1.4.1.1.Inorganic constituents: 
Metal content: Metal ions have been found in venoms from all the species investigated so 
far. Devi [1968], and more recently Friederich and Tu [1971], have done extensive and 
systematic studies of the metal composition of snakes venoms. The latter examined 17 
snake species including the families, Crotalidae, Viperidae and Elapidae. The presence of 
15 metals was analysed. Calcium, zinc magnesium, sodium, potassium and copper were 
widely distributed among the venoms studied. Potassium and sodium were found in highest 
concentration while magnesium, calcium and zinc, were the most prevalent divalent cations. 
None of the venoms contained molybdenum, bismuth, selenium, platinum, palladium, silver, 
or gold. 
Biological Significance: Some divalent metals are required as cofactors for many different 
enzymatic and biological activities. Some venoms possess acetylcholinesterase activity, 
which requires the Zn2+ ion or Co2+ ion [Kumar et al., 1973]. Some venom proteases are 
metalloproteins and contain Ca2+ and Zn2+. The Ca2+ ions, particularly, play a role in the 
activation of phophoslipase A2. Haemorrhagic and proteolytic activity decreases markedly 
after dialysis, [Friederich and Tu, 1971], which is partially restored after the addition of 
magnesium This suggests a role for metal ions in these activities. 
1.4.1.2. Organic Constituents: 
1.4. 1.2. l.Lipids: 
Very little work has been done on snake venom lipids. Ganguly and Malkana., [1936], 
reported that cholesterol and lecithin were present in cobra venom Devi [1968], and Bieber 
[1979] presented results on the lipid content of the venoms from Naja naja and C. d 
terrificus. Kabara and Fischer, [1969] reported that 0.43% of the dry weight of Naja naja 
venom was lipid. The removal of the lipid fraction of Naja naja venom resulted in the loss 
of 40% to 50% of the lethality. Toxicity was not restored by the addition of this fraction to 
the extracted venom They also showed that organic acids of snake venoms are present as 
triglycerides and phospholipids. Moroz et al., [1966], observed a decrease in Vipera 
palestinae neurotoxin activity with the removal of lipids. This toxicity was restored with 
venom reconstitution. From the above observations the fraction appears to be maintaining 
venom toxicity. Citrate was shown to be a major component of snake venoms when venoms 
of Bothrops asper, Crotalus atrox, C. viridiS, C. adamanteus, Sistrurus miliarius barboury, 
C. horrid us horridus, Agkistrodon contortix mokase, A. contortix contortix and A. 
piscivorous piscivorous were analysed by gas liquid chromatography and mass 
spectrometry, [Freitas et al., 1992]. 
1.4.1.2.2.Carbohydrates: 
There is limited information about the carbohydrate content of snake venoms. They are 
found in the form of glycoprotein rather than free sugar, and are present in many venoms 
[Basu et aI., 1970]. Sialic acid was detected in the venom of Naja naja, [Braganya and 
Pate~ 1965] but played no role in toxicity. Oshima and Iwanaga., [1969], investigated many 
venoms and found that most sugars present were either neutra~ amino sugars, or sialic acid. 
No mucopolyssacharide was found. Major venom toxins were proved not to be 
glycoprotein, and the exact biological functions of venom carbohydrates has not yet been 
established. 
1.4.1.2.3.Riboflavin: 
The yellow colour of the majority of snake venoms is due to the presence of L-amino acid 
oxidase, which contains riboflavin as its coenzyme. This enzyme has been found in many 
venoms of different genera. Zeller [1948] demonstrated a correlation between the intensity 
of the yellow colour and the L-amino acid activity of snake venom. White venoms do not 
possess L-amino acid activity. The prosthetic group of L- amino acid oxidase is FAD 
[Singer and Deamey., 1950]. This is true for all snake venoms except for that of 
Trimeresurus jlavoviridis [Inamasu et al., 1974]. 
1.4.1.2.4.Nucleosides and Nucleotides: 
The presence of these compounds in snake venoms has been little studied. Reports showed 
that the nuc1eosides adenosine, guanosine and inocine were the most abundant in the tested 
venoms. Doery [1957], reported the presence of hypoxanthine, a purine base in the venom 
of Notechis scutulatus. Further studies by other authors showed the presence of guanosine, 
adenosine and inocine, all derivatives of purine, in venoms from various different species. 
The total amount of purine compounds in the venom dry weight is between 1.4 and 4.3%. 
The role of these substances in snake venoms is not known and nothing can be said about 
their wide distribution among different snake species [Bieber, 1979]. 
1.4.1.2.S.Free Amino Acids and Peptides: 
Free amino acids are found only in small amounts in snake venoms. However, many authors 
have demonstrated free amino acids in venoms of different species of snake. The ninhydrin 
reaction, paper chromatography and paper electrophoresis have been used to demonstrate 
their presence. [Sasaki, 1960], showed the presence of glycine, serine, cysteine, threonine, 
lysine, tyrosine, valine, phenylalanine and leucine in the venom of Trimeresurus 
musquamatus. Devi [1968]; Hirakawa [1974]; Shipolini et al., [1965], are among the 
authors that have shown free amino acids in different species of snake. The results suggest 
that all amino acids found in proteins are detected in free form in snake venoms. However, 
not all amino acids are found in all venom extracts. In a review [Devi, 1968], the largest 
number was 5 free amino acids in one venom. These studies do not reveal any physiological 
or pharmacological role in venom offree amino acids. Nor is it yet determined whether their 
content is due to their cleavage from proteins through venom protease reactions. 
1.4.2. Proteins 
Snake venom proteins can be divided into three main groups: enzymes, toxins and nelVe 
growth factors. Enzymes are responsible for the tissue necrosis, blood coagulation or 
anticoagulation and pain [Iwanaga and Suzuki, 1979]. Toxins act by disrupting nerve 
transmission or damaging skeletal muscle [Karlsson, 1979]. 
Enzymes and toxins are sometimes distinguished by the fact that some toxins do not have 
enzymatic activity and some enzymes are not toxic. Crotoxin, however, a neurotoxin, has 
phospholipase A2 activity. NelVe growth factors cause differentiation of sympathetic or 
sensory neurones and are found in all Crotalidae, Viperidae and Elapidae venoms so far 
studied [Angeletti et al., 1979; Levi-Montalcini and Angeletti, 1968]. 
1.4.2. 1. Enzymes 
There are 26 enzymes so far identified in various snake venoms, of which ten are present in 
every snake venom, although no single snake contains all of them. Some are characteristic 
of snake families: Elapidae have acetylcholinesterase which is never found in Viperidae. 
Crotalid and viperid venoms contain endopeptidase, arginine ester hydrolase, thrombin-like 
enzymes, collagenase, hyaluronidase and prothrombin activator which are not found in other 
snake venoms so far investigated [Iwanaga and Suzuki, 1979]. Enzymes fOWld in snake 
venoms can be broadly classified as proteolytic, arginine ester hydro lases, collagenase, 
hyaluronidase, phospholipase A, phospholipase B, phosphodiesterase, acetylcholinesterase, 
5' nucleotidase and L-amino oxidase [Tu, 1977]. The pathophysiological activity of these 
enzymes can be summarised as follows: local capillary damage and tissue necrosis caused by 
proteinases, phospholipases, arginine ester hydrolases and hyaluronidases [Kaiser and 
Michl, 1958; Slotta, 1955; Suzuki and Iwanaga., 1970]; coagulant and anticoagulant 
effects caused by proteinases and phospholipase A [Meaume, 1966]; acute hypotension and 
pain due to release of vasoactive peptides by kinin-releasing enzymes (kininogenase) 
[Suzuki and Iwanaga., 1970]. 
Snake venom toxins are mainly divided into those acting on muscle cells, capillaries, or skin, 
(proteins with or without enzymatic activity), those acting on the nervous system, (post-
synaptic or pre-synaptic, small peptides or enzymes), and those acting on cell membranes 
( cardiotoxins). 
1. 4. 2. 2.Neurotoxins 
1.4.2.2.1.Post synaptic neurotoxins: 
These neurotoxins bind to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors competitively with 
acetylcholine, producing a non-depolarising neuromuscular block. They are subdivided into 
two main groups, the short chain neurotoxins (60 to 65 amino acids and four disulphide 
bridges) and long-chain neurotoxins (71 to 74 amino acids and five disulphide bridges). 
Molecular weights vary from 7 to 8 kDa [Harris, 1989; Minton, 1990]. 
1.4.2.2.2.Pre synaptic neurotoxins: 
These inhibit the release of acetylcholine at the myoneural junction. These toxins are 
phospholipases, or have phospholipase as a subunit. Hydrolytic activity is essential for the 
expression of toxicity. Most have molecular weights of 13 to 22 kDa, with few having 
multiple subunits and correspondingly higher molecular weight [Harris, 1989; Minton, 
1990]. 
1.4.2.3.Myotoxins 
These are characterised as either small basic polypeptides with no enzymatic activity or as 
large, basic proteins possessing phospholipase A2 activity. Snake venom polypeptides that 
induce skeletal muscle contracture or produce myonecrosis or myoglobinuria are 
characterised as myotoxins [Stocker, 1990a]. 
1.4.2.3.1.Non-enzymatic myotoxins: 
The non-enzymatic myotoxins so far isolated are very similar to each other in amino acid 
sequence, molecular weight and isoelectric point. Stocker, [1990a] and Mebs, [1985] 
descnoed seven myotoxic polypeptides consisting of 42-50 amino acid residues and 3 
intramolecular disulphide bridges. 
A basic dimeric polypeptide with a subunit molecular weight of 16 kDa has been found in 
the venom of Bothrops nummifer. This causes muscle cell damage in vivo and in vitro and, 
when injected intramuscularly in mice, leads to the release of creatine kinase. It appears to 
be devoid of PLA2 activity. A myotoxin devoid of phospholipase A2 activity was isolated 
from B. jararacussu snake venom Called Bothropstoxin or BthTX, it is a single chain 
peptide with a molecular weight of 13 kDa, with 12 half cysteine residues. It has an 
isoelectric point of8.2 [Homsi-Brandeburgo et ai., 1988]. 
1.4.2.4.Phospholipase A2 myotoxins: 
These myotoxins are potent neurotoxins, mainly presynaptic. They are classified as B-
neurotoxins or phospholipase A2 myotoxins. Their composition varies, as some consist of 
only a single amino acid chain and others consist of two, three, or more polypeptide chains 
non-covalently bound. They are homologous to mammalian phospholipases. In 
phospholipase A2 myotoxins with subunits, the acidic subunit does not cause myonecrosis 
by itse1 but only potentiates the myonecrosis caused by the basic subunit, which is 
myotoxic on its own [Ownby, 1990 ; Rosenberg, 1990] 
1.4.2.5.Haemorrhagic toxins 
These are proteins which can be basic, neutral or acidic. All haemorrhagic toxins isolated to 
date have proteolytic activity when tested using casein or dimethylcasein as a substrate. 
Many toxins have fibrinogenolytic activity. Their structure varies widely, and they can be 
divided into two groups; low molecular weight (22 to 26 kDa) and high molecular weight 
(60 to 90 kDa). Haemorrhagins cause disruption of the collagenous basement membrane of 
the vascular endothelium allowing leakage of blood components [Kamiguti et al., 1991; 
Ownby, 1990]. Three haemorragic factors have been isolated from the venom of Bjararaca 
and 2 from the venom of B. neuwiedi, [Assakura et al., 1986]. Although haemorrhagins are 
known as locally acting agents, recently, Kamiguti et al., [1991] reported that a 
haemorrhaging fraction from the venom of B. jararaca induces systemic bleeding in rats. 
1.4.2.6.Cardiotoxins 
These are highly basic polypeptides consisting of about 60-62 aminoacid residues, with four 
intramolecular disulphide bridges. They are also known as cytotoxins, and direct lytic factor 
[Harris, 1989]. The pharmacological actions of cardiotoxins comprise haemolysis, cytolysis, 
depolarisation of muscle membranes, and specific cardiotoxicity. These toxins act by 
disorganising the membrane of cells, but their mode of action is still unknown. 
Sarafotoxins are a group of several cardiotoxic polypeptides which have been isolated from 
the venom of the burrowing snake, Atractaspis engaddensis. The amino acid sequence 
shows a high degree of homology with that of endothelin, a 21-residue vasoconstrictor 
peptide found in porcine aortic endothelium [Weiser et al., 1984] 
1.4.2.7.Proteinase Inhibitors 
Several polypeptides, composed of 52-65 amino acids and cross-linked by 2-3 disulphide 
bridges, have been isolated from some elapid and viperid venoms. They act either as 
proteinase inhibitors or represent structural analogues of proteinase inhibitors. Some 
inhibitor analogues which are devoid of any proteinase inhibitor potency exert an 
acetylcholine release-facilitating effect on the neuromuscular junction [Stocker, 1990a]. 
1.4.2.8.Bradykinin-Potentiating Peptides 
These are a number of closely related peptides, widely distributed in venoms from many 
species. They are low molecular weight, proline rich peptides composed of 5 to 12 amino 
acids residues, that potentiate the depressor activity of bradykinin. This effect is mediated 
by an inhibition of the carboxypeptidase that converts angiotensin I into angiotensin ll. They 
have been isolated from the venoms of B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, Agkistrodon haiys 
biomhoffi and A. h. pallas. 
Ferreira [1965] showed for the first time the presence of bradykinin-potentiation activity by 
peptides in the venom of Bothrops jararaca. Kato et ai., [1966], isolated two tripeptides, A 
and B, from venoms of A. halys biomhoffi, C. adamanteus, Bothrops jararaca and 
Trimeresurus jlavoviridis. Ferreira et ai., [1970] purified nine peptides from the venom of 
B. jararaca. The smallest had five amino acids and the largest 13. Their sequence showed 
the presence of pyroglutamic acid, in the amino terminal position. This is a characteristic of 
all snake venom peptides that exibit bradykinin potentiation and inhibition of the angiotensin 
I to angiotensin IT conversion. Longer peptides also have a common carboxyl terminus. 
With one exception, all end in isoleucine-(proline )2. They tend to produce longer 
physiological effects [Ondetti et ai., 1971]. 
A new Bradykinin-Potentiating peptide (peptide P) has been isolated from the venom of B. 
jararacussu. Its molecular weight is 1,095 Da, as determined by mass spectrometry. Its 
bradykinin-potentiated activity, tested in the guinea-pig ileum, was stronger than that 
observed from captopril, bradykinin potentiator B and BPf5a, appearing to be three-fold 
more potent than captopril [Ferreira et ai., 1992]. 
1.4.2.9.Choline Esterase Inhibitors 
A protein of 55 kDa which inhibits also choline esterase has been found in the venom of the 
many banded krait Bungarus multicinctus. It has also been isolated from the venom of Naja 
naja atra [Takeuchi and Tanaka., 1980]. 
1.4.2.10.Phospholipase Inhibitors 
A polypeptide with molecular weight between 1,500 and 5,000, Da as estimated by gel 
chromatography, with phospolipase A2 inhibition activity, was isolated from the venom of 
Bothrops neuwiedi. A phospholipase inhibitor was found also in the venom of Naja naja 
and there is evidence for the presence of such inhibitors in the venoms of B. jararaca, B. 
jararacussu and B. atrox. Vipoxin, a pre synaptic neurotoxin from Vipera ammodytes 
ammodytes venom, has a basic toxic component with weak phospholipase activity and an 
atoxic acidic component containing the inhibiting activity [Rosenberg, 1990; Stocker, 
1990a] 
1.4.2. 1 1. NelVe Growth Factors (NGF) 
These are snake venom proteins that in tissue culture, produce outgrowth of nelVe tissue. 
This activity has been identified in six species of the subfamily Viperinae, nine species from 
the subfamily Crotalinae and five species from the subfamily Elapidae. Molecular weights 
range from 21 to 54 kDa. The molecular structure is varied and some have two subunits, 
the one from Crotalus adamanteus venom is a protein complex of 40 to 54 kDa. Vipera 
russel/i's NGF is a glycoprotein of 37 kDa, the NGF of Bothrops jararaca has a molecular 
weight of 34 kDa and that of Bothrops atrox is a dimer with 35 kDa [Angeletti and 
Bradshaw., 1979; Stocker, 1990a] 
1.4.2. 12.Lectins 
Haemagglutinating activity has been reported in many snake venoms and several lectins 
have been isolated from them. The natural role of the vast majority of lectins is not known, 
but they are useful biochemical tools due to their ability to bind specific sequences of 
sugars. Five lectins were isolated from the snake venoms of Agkistrodon contortrix 
contortrix, A. piscivorous leucostoma, C. atrox, B. atrox and Dendroaspis jamesoni. 
Thrombolectin from B. atrox [Gartner et a., 1980] and lectins from A. c. contortrix, A. p. 
leucostoma and C. atrox were characterised as disulphide-linked dimers of molecular weight 
28 kDa and their lactose-specific red cell agglutinating action was Ca2+ dependent. The 
lectin from D. jamesoni was also lactose-specific but not Ca2+ dependent. All lectins 
investigated, except Thrombolectin, exerted a mitogenic action. Recently a galactose-
binding lectin from the venom of B. goodmani was isolated which did not exert mitogenic 
activity on human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. It is an acidic protein (PI 4.9), with a 
subunit of 14 kDa, which exists mostly as a disulphide dimer of 28 kDa [Mastro et a., 
1986; Stocker, 1990a]. 
1.4.2. 13.Proteins Affecting Platelet Functions 
There are different types of components affecting platelet functions in snake venoms, such 
as non-coagulant inducers of platelet aggregation, platelet aggregation inhibitors, platelet 
aggregation inducers. These can be classified as enzymic or non-enzymic. Echis carinatus 
venom contains an inhibitor of collagen-induced platelet aggregation. It is a heat-stable 
glycopeptide with a molecular weight of 6.8 kDa. Agglutination offormol-fixed platelets in 
the presence of von Willebrand factor is induced by venom co agglutinins, which are non 
enzymic proteins found in numerous Viperidae and Crotalidae snake venoms. The 
interaction of these coagglutinins with platelets and von Willebrand factor is species-
specific. Thrombolectin, a lectin from B. atrox venom, may also cause platelet agglutination 
[Stocker, 1990b]. 
1.5. Immunological and Biological characterisation of Snake Venoms 
The study of snake venom immunology has progressed substantially since its early days at 
the end of the nineteenth century. Development of knowledge can be characterised by three 
main steps. First, animals injected with non lethal doses of a venom developed resistance 
against it. Second, venoms were shown to be a "mosaic of antigens" and cross-reactivity 
and cross-neutralisation was shown to exist; the resistance conferred to animals through the 
neutralisation of the venoms was found to be due to specific immunoglobulins. Third, is the 
current emphasis on the elucidation of the molecular characteristics of toxic components of 
venoms by immunological means [Menez, 1985]. 
The study of the biological activities of snake venoms developed in parallel with the 
immunological studies. The identification and isolation of venom components exerting 
specific biological functions was important in the further characterisation of venoms and 
their variability. The characterisation of isolated components made possible the use of 
specific antisera as therapeutic reagents and as research tools. 
The literature contains extensive reviews on this subject, e.g. [Boquet, 1979; Hawgood, 
1992; Menez, 1985; Menez et al., 1990; Russell, 1988; Russell and Lauritzen., 1966] and I 
will attempt here to highlight only some of the more fundamental work on the 
immunological and biological characterisation of snake venoms, with emphasis on studies of 
the Bothrops genera. 
1.5.1. Historical background 
Sewall [1887], was the first to show that pigeons immunised with non-lethal doses of 
Sistrurus catenatus venom, for a period of months, could survive a dose lethal to non 
immunised pigeons. Experimenting on small rodents, Kaufinann, [1889], Phisalix and 
Bertrand, [1894], came to the same conclusions using the venom of Vipera aspis. Later, 
Phisalix, Bertrand, Calmette and Fraser, all demonstrated that the serum of immunised 
animals contained the antitoxic activity [cited by Russell, 1988]. This led directly to the 
therapeutic use of hyper-immunised animal serum against snake venom poisoning 
[Calmette, 1894; Fraser, 1895]. Calmette postulated that his antivenom, produced against 
cobra venom, could neutralise any venom, since all snake venoms possessed the same toxic 
components, varying only in quantity, but this was soon disproved. It was shown that 
venoms contained distinct biological properties; some could coagulate the blood, others 
inhibited coagulation and others disrupted the nervous system, agglutinated and lysed 
mammalian erythrocytes, while others behaved as proteolytic substances and some arrested 
an isolated heart in systole [Boquet, 1979]. 
Experiments with venom and antivenom demonstrated that some venoms could have more 
than one effect upon the victim and that venoms belonging to the same family, or even 
different families, contained toxic substances of a very similar nature. Antivenoms could 
neutralise or attenuate to various degrees similar toxic properties of venoms other than the 
ones they were prepared against [Boquet, 1979]. In the light of these observations the term 
"mosaic of antigens" was used to describe this diversity. Experimenters had the task of 
characterising and understanding this diversity. 
1.5.2.Snake venom characterisation 
Immunological techniques, such as gel immunodifusion, immunoelectrophoresis, ELISA, 
and also physicochemical approaches were widely used to demonstrate immunological and 
biological similarities and differences in snake venoms belonging to various genera, families 
and species. 
Although single antivenoms could inhibit toxic effects of venoms belonging to different 
species, it was also shown that in some cases they could be ineffective against venoms of 
snakes of the same species but from different geographical regions. Vellard [1939], reported 
that antivenoms produced against the venom of Crotalus durissus terriftcus in the south of 
Brazil, were unable to neutralise the venoms of the same species from Venezuela. 
Gon9alves and Vieira, [1950], using electrophoretic and toxicity experiments, showed 
differences in the venom composition of individual snakes of the same species (Crotalus 
durissus terriftcus). This difference was responsible for eliciting distinct symptoms in mice. 
Specimens from southern Brazil were shown to contain a neurotoxic component, 
"crotamine", which was not present in other Crotalus durissus terriftcus from the north of 
Brazil. The author also refers to a personal communication of Vital Brazil, in which 
Crotalidae venoms from Argentina and Goias (a Central-West state of Brazil) elicited in 
rats distinct pharmacological effects. Based on his observation, Gon9alves and Vieira, 
postulated the importance of producing antivenoms with geographical specificity 
1.6. Antivenoms. 
Antivenoms were first produced for therapeutic use [Calmette, 1894; Phisalix and 
Bertrand, 1894], who immunised horses with increasing doses of snake venoms. In 1901, 
Vita1-Brazil, prepared antivenoms against Bothropic and Crotalic venoms [Hawgood, 
1992]. 
Little improvement m the basic processmg methodology of hyperimmune serum has 
occurred through the years. The stages in production of commercial antivenoms involves: 
courses of immunisation of horses, collection of plasma, ammonium sulphate precipitation 
of the hyperimmune serum, enzyme digestion of the serum and concentration and packaging 
[Sullivan, 1987]. 
The World Health Organisation, [WHO, 1981] published a set of guidelines to help 
standardisation of antivenoms covering every aspect of antivenom production. 
Venoms from snakes of the same species should be collected from different areas, and 
should include those species causing major health problems. Venoms should be 
characterised by measuring the lethal, defibrinating, haemorrhagic and necrotising activities. 
Immunisation schedules can be optimised by the laboratories. Horses should be 5-8 years 
old, in good health and be vaccinated against tetanus. Antivenom antibodies should be 
concentrated by any suitable method, and preferably enzyme-refined to become less prone 
to elicit allergic reactions. No definite method for the assessment of antivenom potency is 
available; a suggested procedure involves testing the neutralisation of lethality, necrotising, 
defibrinating and other venom activities, comparing a test antivenom against a reference 
venom. Generally this test is carried out by mixing and incubating venom and antivenom and 
injecting the mixture into mice. 
1.6.1.lmmunisation and venom characteristics 
Venoms contain many active components that act locally or systemically. Apart from the 
damage they can cause to the horses, there is also a concern about the immunogenicity of 
the components. Small highly toxic components, usually bad immunogens, are sometimes 
injected with large non-toxic, but good immunogens into horses. Some authorities argue 
that these large components will divert the immune response away from the small toxic 
component and that to achieve high titres of antibodies against the small toxic component, 
large doses would be required. The damage to the animals, even if the doses were to be 
increased slowly, would still be excessive. 
Some venoms are good immunogens as a whole, and high titres are obselVed at completion 
of the immunisation schedule. Bothropic venoms are one such example, but prolonged 
immunisations are deleterious to the animals, usually meaning a short period of productive 
life for the horse. 
Many methods have been tried, with variable degrees of success, to increase antibody titres, 
while shortening immunisation periods and limiting or abolishing animal damage. 
1.6.2. Venom detoxification and adjuvants 
Various added substances and pre-treatment processes have been tried, including 
hypochloride-treatment of venoms and mixtures of soap and venom Detoxification of 
venom by photo-oxidation in the presence of Methylene Blue was used with little success. 
Hydrogen-peroxide has been used in the presence of traces of copper, and bile-detoxified 
venoms and venoms treated with organic gold. None of these methods was of practical use. 
Formalin rendered venoms atoxic but also largely non-immunogenic [Christensen, 1979; 
Sullivan, 1987]. Recently, iodination with non-radioactive iodine rendered snake venom 
atoxic but with retained immunogenicity [Daniel et aI., 1987; Heneine et ai., 1988]. 
Other methods not involving detoxification but adsorption of the venoms onto inert carriers 
have been successful in many instances. The slow absorption rate of the venom from the 
injection site minimises the harmful effects. Prolonged stimulation by the antigen usually 
elicits a good immune response. CaImette, working on an idea received from Dr. Rou~ 
impregnated chalk with venom and coated it with collodion. Other adsorbents were 
aluminium phosphate, aluminium hydroxide, bentonite, Freund's adjuvant, olive oil and gum 
arabic and sodium chloride [Christensen, 1979]. 
Recently, the use of venom incorporated into liposomes or into osmicated liposomes, has 
been shown to elicit an effective and sustained immune response with a small number of 
doses, usually one or two [Freitas et al., 1989; New et al., 1984; Theakston, 1989a]. 
Venoms can be incorporated into lip o somes, whether detoxified or not. Both oral and 
parenteral immunisations with venom incorporated into liposomes has produced high 
antibody titres [Laing et al., 1987]. 
Most of these adjuvants will find supporters and critics. Their success very much depends 
on how they are prepared and on how the assessment of improvement is made. 
1.6.3. Practical Considerations of Antivenom Production 
The guidelines published by WHO [1981] are not always followed exactly. Each country 
has its peculiar modifications and the decision on how best to accommodate local conditions 
within the WHO guidelines has to be made locally. 
The decision of which venom or venoms to use as antigens is normally based on the 
frequency of bites by different snakes, the severity of the effects and availability. Availability 
is important for a continuing production programme and can be achieved either by keeping 
a collection of snakes for venom extraction or by buying venoms from a certified producer. 
The second option has the problem of not being able to certify the species origin of the 
venom, as there is not to date an acknowledged method of so doing. 
Which venom or venoms to use in the immunisation schedules is also a problem The 
criteria based on the frequency of bites is disputed, as conflicting snakebite statistics exists 
and it is impossible to correctly identify the offending snake in the majority of accidents. 
This makes any data on the subject statistically invalid. In addition the data on frequency of 
bites is normally biased towards regions and it does not represent the real numbers in the 
country as a whole. Cardoso and Brando, [1982] reported that 90% of the Bothropic bites 
in Sao Paulo State, treated in the Hospital Vital Brazil, were due to B. jararaca. 
Kouyoumdjian et a/., [1988] reported that in the region of Sao Jose do Rio Preto, in the 
north of the Sao Paulo State, B. moojeni was responsible for the majority of the bites, 
(88%) followed by B. alternatus, (9.5%) and B. jararaca, (1.5%). In a SUlVey of the 
snakebite accidents in the metropolitan area of the city of Salvador, (Capital of Bahia, a 
North-Eastern State of Brazil), the sole causal agent was Bothrops leucurus. In countries in 
which there are various species of snakes of medical importance, the composition of the 
immunising mixture is highly relevant. 
Antivenoms can be monovalent, made by immunising with only one venom, or polyvalent, 
made by immunising with a mixture of venoms based on the frequency of bites. In Brazil the 
commercial production of antivenoms is based on an arbitrary mixture of fixed proportions 
of venoms, based on accidents treated in the Hospital Vital Brazil in the city of Sao Paulo. 
The complex nature of venom composition and its variability, raises questions concerning 
the ability of the antivenom to neutralise the relevant components responsible for the 
pathophysiological action of the venom as a whole and of components of venoms not 
present in the mixture [Dias da Silva et al., 1989; Moura da Silva et al., 1990]. This 
preoccupation dates back to 1955. In cross-neutralisation studies of Bothropic venoms, 
three monovalent antivenoms were shown to be as potent and polyspecific as the polyvalent 
antibothropic sera. It was concluded that anyone of three venoms could be used alone for 
immunisation and that the antivenoms produced would each have the polyvalence and 
potency needed to treat any Bothropic accident of Brazil. The venom of B. jararaca was 
suggested by the author [Schortler, 1955]. 
However, recent reports contradict these findings. Experiments on the cross-speCIes 
neutralisation of ten Bothrops venoms by monovalent antivenom sera (raised against a 
single venom species) revealed that a mixture of venoms of B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, B. 
alternauts, B. moojeni and B. neuwiedi, should be in the "pool" of venoms used for 
immunisation. The antibodies elicited by the mixture were capable of neutralising, to varying 
degrees, the lethal activities present in all ten venoms [Dias da Silva et aI., 1989]. 
In another set of experiments, extensive cross-reactivity of Bothropic venoms was reported, 
confirming older data from the literature. The monovalent antivenoms to B. erythromela 
and B. moojeni neutralise the venom of B. jararaca as efficiently as the homologous 
antivenom [Moura da Silva et al., 1990]. 
In a study of the neutralisation of the haemorrhagic activity of Bothropic venoms by the 
polyvalent anti-Bothropic serum, Domingues et al., [1990a], reported a low neutralising 
potency against the B. jararaca venom, which comprises 50% of the venom "pool". The 
author argues that the criteria based on the frequency of bites to make the immunising 
venom "pool" should be revised. 
Moura da Silva et al., [1990], performed studies based on observations of structural 
homology and possible similar biological activities between a myotoxin from B. jararacussu 
venom with PLA2 activity, and the PLA2 of Crotalus durissus terrificus. The results showed 
that the anti-Bothropic-Crotalic antivenom was more efficient in neutralising the 
haemorrhagic, lethal and myonecrotic effects of the B. jararacussu venom than the anti-
Bothropic antivenom normally used for treatment of poisonings from this snake. 
The criteria for testing the neutralisation potency of antivenoms uses one reference venom 
that should be representative of the venoms in the "pool". The activity presently tested is 
lethality. The WHO guidelines suggests also the assessment of other venom activities, such 
as haemorrhagic, necrotising, coagulant and defibrinating properties. 
A study was performed on the neutralisation of the haemorrhagic activity of B. jararaca 
reference veno~ B. atrox venom and Lachesis muta veno~ by the anti-Bothropic, 
(FUNED), anti-Bothropic-Lachetic, (FUNED) and anti-Lachetic, (But ant an) antivenoms. 
The authors concluded that the criteria of accident frequency used to choose the reference 
venom is not valid and it should be based on quantitative studies of cross-neutralisation 
[Domingues, et al. ,.1990b]. 
These findings probably represent the situation not only in Brazil, but also in other countries 
where different poisonous snakes exist. They indicate a need for further study on the 
characterisation of toxicity and biological activities of snake venoms and especially of cross-
neutralisation. 
1.6.4. Present Situation and Studies on Antivenom Production 
The present situation of antivenom production has not evolved much further from earlier 
practice. The enzyme-purified antivenom probably has been the only improvement; it 
minimises the chances of allergic reactions. However the fractionation by ammonium 
sulphate does not adequately purify the product. The remaining non-immunoglobulin 
content is high and contributes to host adverse reactions such as serum sickness [Sullivan 
1987]. 
Purification of antivenom IgG by affinity chromatography has been performed on antibody 
with high affinity towards Crotalid venoms. The purified immunoglobulin was mainly 
IgG(T), [Sullivan, 1987]. Experiments have shown that horse IgG(T) is superior to whole 
antivenom in lethality protection and protection to toxic effects [Sullivan, 1987]. Recently, 
Fernandes et al., [1991], compared the neutralising potencies of horse IgG, horse IgG(T) 
and horse IgG depleted of IgG(T). The results showed that both IgG and IgG(T) had the 
same neutralising potency, whereas IgG depleted of IgG(T) had a greatly reduced potency, 
indicating that the neutralising capacity resides mostly with the IgG(T). 
A novel approach for the preparation of antivenom is the use of avian antibodies. Carrol et 
al., [1992] immunised hens with detoxified venoms and purified antibodies from the egg 
yolk, (IgY), using PEG-precipitation followed by affinity chromatography on venom 
adsorbents. On a protein weight basis the two avian antivenoms tested were 6.3 and 2.0 
times more effective than the respective reference sera, produced in horses. 
Studies on antivenom cross-neutralisation of specific toxic components has provided 
evidence that some specific components can elicit antivenoms that are more potent than 
others and have greater polyvalence. Also, some venoms possess larger quantities of these 
specific toxic components than others. Based on these facts it has been proposed to isolate 
components accounting for the main toxic effects such as neurotoxicity, coagulation, 
necrotising activity, haemorrhagins, etc., and to inject them as a mixture to produce more 
effective antivenoms [Mebs and Doll, 1992; Mebs et al., 1988]. The isolated toxic 
component( s) can also be used to enrich venom "pools" used in antivenom production. 
In a study to investigate the effects of different immunogens on the potency of antivenoms, 
Li and Ownby, [1992], separated the venoms of Crotalus atrox, C. adam an te us, C. d 
terrific us into different molecular weight fractions, small, medium and large. In comparing 
the antivenoms produced separately to each fraction, with the commercially available Wyeth 
antivenom, no improvement was observed regarding lethality protection and neutralisation 
ofhaemorrhagic activities. 
Monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) capable of blocking or neutralising toxic fractions may be a 
future possibility for providing specific protection. However the mode of action of Mabs is 
not known and it is critically important to determine whether the antibodies interact at the 
toxic or enzymatic site of the molecule. The application of antibodies for treatment of 
Viperinae envenoming is less hopeful, as a multiplicity of toxins are responsible for the 
systemic signs. A "cocktail" of monoclonal antibodies would be needed [Theakston, 1989b]. 
Menez [1985] considered that in the case of elapid bites, one monoclonal antibody could 
neutralise the main toxin. 
Another possibility is that high molecular weight toxic components may have many 
antigenic determinants and there is concern about the possibility that only one antibody 
could be able to exert neutralisation [perez et al., 1984]. 
In contrast, Iddon et al., [1988] and Pukrittayakamee et al., [1983], have reported on 
monoclonal antibodies which are capable of significant neutralisation of venom components, 
factor X activator of Russell's viper and the haemorrhagic factor of the Nigerian Echis 
carinatus respectively. 
Some toxic components are known to have isotypes. Crotoxin has 15, [Faure and Boll., 
1987], and it is also critical to test specificity, affinity and neutralisation potency of the 
antibodies against the toxin isotypes. 
A study [Middlebrook, 1991], on the neutralisation ofpseudexin by monoclonal antibodies 
has been reported. Three monoclonal antibodies were able to recognise all pseudexin 
isotypes (isozymes). In some cases antibody binding was essentially equivalent with each 
pseudexin isozyme. On the other hand, several monoclonal antibodies differed by two to 
three orders of magnitude in their binding to different pseudexin isozymes. In competition 
assays to displace rabbit polyclonal IgG, the maximum values observed were 45-50% 
inhibition. A mixture of monoclonal antibodies produced essentially the same result. 
Stiles [1991], tested twelve monoclonal against cobrotoxin from Naja naja atra venom for 
cross-reactivity with eight different snake venoms toxins binding to linear epitopes, and for 
preventing cobrotoxin binding to acetylcholine receptor (AchR) in vitro, and for protection 
of mice against cobrotoxin. There was little reactivity with other snake toxins. None of the 
monoclonal antibodies bound to the reduced cobrotoxin or any of the synthesised regions of 
cobrotoxin spanning the whole molecule, thus suggesting the recognition of conformational 
epitopes. The in vitro binding of toxin to AchR was competitively inhibited to varying 
degrees even when the antibodies were pre-incubated prior to the addition of AchR The 
inhibition was dependent on the antibody:toxin ratio. An antibody:toxin ratio of 2.5: 1, with 
6 J,g of cobrotoxin, delayed the time of death of mice 3.7-23.8-fold compared with control 
mtce. 
1.6.5. Future Contribution of Recombinant DNA Technology 
Recombinant DNA technology is just beginning to be applied to the study of snake venoms. 
The ability to clone toxins, (haemorrhagins, neurotoxins, myotoxins or mutant forms with 
single or more mutations) will allow the possibility to look into the many aspects governing 
toxicity, mode of action, immunological reactivity, neutralisation and crosspecific-
neutralisation. Mutant toxins with retained immunogenicity but no toxicity could be 
envisaged as ideal immunising agents. Tamya et aI., [1985] has cloned the cDNA encoding 
a curarimetric precursor with the aim of producing mutant proteins with single mutations by 
means of site-directed mutagenesis. 
1 .7. Envenomation 
Changes in the physiological equilibrium state of a person is the characteristic result of 
envenoming. Bites by venomous snakes do not always result in envenoming. The figures 
reported vary, but about 20% to 40% of bites do not cause any envenoming [Boyden, 1980; 
Talpers and Bergin., 1985]. However the consequences of snakebite are unpredictable in 
their early stages, and medical observation is needed to assess the severity of the clinical 
symptoms. 
The severity of snakebite is dependent upon many factors; age and general health of the 
victim, bite site, amount of venom injected, species involved, sensitivity of the patient to 
venom and treatment. 
The complex nature of snake venom composition and their variability account for widely 
variable clinical manifestations [Chippaux et al., 1991]. 
The previously held views of separate properties of cytotoxic and haematoxic viperid 
venoms, neurotoxic elapid venoms and myotoxic sea snake venom, is today untenable 
[Warrell, 1992]. The increased amount of data on snake envenoming has shown that 
venoms belonging to snakes of different families can induce similar signs and symptoms, and 
snakes from the same species but from geographically distant places induce different clinical 
manifestations of envenoming. 
Generally the syndromes reported include, oedema, haemolysis, shock, bleeding, pituitary 
failure, renal failure, myonecrosis, neurotoxicity. and combinations of the above [Nelson, 
1989]. 
In Brazil, data on the epidemiology of ophidic accidents has been scarce but more data is 
becoming available due to a concerted effort from the Ministry of Health and producers of 
antivenoms. A recent review gives an update on the information on snakebite and mortality 
in Brazil. In the begtlDing of the century the number of ophidic accidents were then 
evaluated as 19,200 each year, being mainly due to the Bothrops species. In the year of 
1987, 21,463 cases with 123 deaths were notified to the Department of Health. The 
incidence for Brazil was calculated as 15.5/100,000 inhabitants and the death rate of 0.6% 
showed a variation within the geographic macro regions from 0.3% (Southeast) to 2.1% 
(North). From June 1986 to December 1987, there were 20,884 notifications of accidents 
with information on the genus of the offending snake. The majority, 88.3%, were caused by 
Bothrops, 8.3% by Crotalus, 2.7% by Lachesis and 0.7% by Micrurus. The number of 
deaths caused by the Bothrops species were greatest followed by Crotalus, but this may be 
due to the frequency of their presence because the deadliness ofbothropic accidents (0.5
is low compared to the crotalic (3.0%). A similar picture is obselVed in the State of Sao 
Paulo, Brazil, where, for the years of 1986, 1987 and 1988, 6,308 accidents were notified 
( incidence of6.8/100,000 inhabitants). The cases (4,685) with reference to the genus of the 
snake were: 85.3% by Bothrops, 13.6% by Crotalus and 1.1% by Micrurus. Lethality was 
0.3%. Bites occur mostly over the hot season when snakes are more active, and within the 
rural areas where the rural labourer without adequate protective clothing (long-leg boots. 
puttees and leather gloves) are at high risk. Interestingly the most severe accidents occur 
with workers using long-leg boots and puttees, usually caused by large snakes [Ribeiro, 
1990]. It is noteworthy that the higher death rates occur in regions where the antivenoms 
used for treatment were not produced with venoms from snakes present in those areas. 
1.7.1. Clinical Effects of Envenoming 
1. 7 .1.1.Blood Disorders 
In most cases where there IS envenommg by pit vipers, the most common systemic 
disturbance is blood incoagulability and increased coagulation times [Misra and Misra., 
1982; Nelson, 1989; Sano-Martins, 1990]. However systemic bleedings are less common. 
The incoagulability is attributed mainly to fibrinogen consumption induce by thrombin-like 
fractions. Mild thrombocytopenia is usually obselVed. 
1. 7.1.2.Local Effects 
1. 7 .1.2.1.Pain 
Usually thought to be the characteristic of viperid venoms, it is seen in elapid bites and is 
absent in some viperid envenomation [Campbell, 1979; Minton, 1990; Warrell, 1989]. 
Immediately following the bite there is some pain, which almost always is confined to the 
area of the bite. In cases of Vipera russelli venom it can be extended to the lymph nodes 
[Warrell, 1989]. Cobra bites almost invariably are painful [Minton, 1990]. It is present in 
the North American Crotalus but rarely reported in bites by the South American Crotalus. 
1.7.1.2.2.0edema and Swelling 
This is predominantly seen with vasculotoxic venoms such as the viperids. It is present also 
with cobra venoms, specially the Africa spitting cobras, Naja nigricolis and Naja 
mossambica where there is a marked local swelling. It is less evident with Kraits and 
Mambas, both elapids [Minton, 1990]. 
Oedema is usually seen around the injured area, within minutes to 2 hours of the bite. 
Swelling is limited to the subcutaneous tissues. The swollen part is painful to palpation. The 
swelling may extend to other parts of the body and peak between the second and fourth 
Local oedema is typical of Bothropic bites. It is probably caused by the direct effect of 
venom on vessels and release of endogenous mediators like histamine, kinins and 
prostaglandins, (due to the action of venom components on mast cells), kininogens and 
phospholipids or a combination of these. In Bothropic snake bites the degree of swelling has 
prognostic value [Rosenfeld, 1971]. 
1. 7 .1.2.3.Echymoses 
Echymoses and discoloration of the skin often appear within several hours of the bite. 
Echymosis may occur along with oedema and without bleb formation. It is not usually 
confined to the bitten area and can be seen over the entire extremity. Discoloration is 
sometimes seen with cobra bites, often preceding necrosis [Minton, 1990]. 
1.7.1.2.4.Necrosis 
This is caused mainly by viperid venoms. Contrary to the belief that myonecrosis is caused 
by a rise in intracompartmental pressure, it is now known to be due to; a) direct action of 
myotoxins on the skeletal muscle plasma membrane, b) ischemia, thrombosis blocking local 
blood vessels causing dry gangrene as a consequence of the vascular damage, and 
haemorrhage and arterial lesions. 
1.7.1.3.Shock 
The principal cause of shock is the loss of plasma and blood cells into tissues in the area of 
the bite, as well as into the lungs, peritoneum and other parts of the body. Early shock is 
common with some vipers and can be very dangerous if it occurs within the first three days. 
It usually happens between the 6th and 26th hours of envenoming. Tendency to shock is 
recidivist and ends in death [Misra and Misra., 1982; Rosenfeld, 1971]. 
1. 7.1.4.Neurotoxicity 
This is a predominant feature of elapid and hydrophid bites. It is also observed in bites of 
rattlesnakes from the Sistrurus and Crotalus genera. Few neurotoxins have been identified 
in venoms of vipers. Before the onset of muscle paralysis there are pre-paralytic symptoms, 
common to most Elapid bites: vomiting, the commonest, appears within 5 minutes of the 
bite and headache within 2 minutes which may last for up to one day. Another main 
symptom is the development of cranial nerve palsies. These are characteristically manifested 
as ptosis and ophtalmoplegia with blurred vision or diplopia, difficulty in swallowing with 
an inability to handle oral secretions, slurred speech, weakness of facial muscles and 
occasionally loss of the sense of smell and taste. The pupils are usually dilated and have a 
slow response to light. Drowsiness often accompanies this syndrome, sometimes with 
mental confusion, which is an important sign of respiratory failure. Flaccid paralysis affects 
all muscle groups. Breathing becomes shallow and diaphragmatic. The patient becomes 
cyanosed and paralysed, consciousness is lost, convulsions may occur and eventually there 
is cardiac arrest. Pre-synaptic neurotoxins tend to have a delayed onset but give prolonged 
symptoms, whereas post-synaptic toxins account for early paralytic symptoms, such as 
ptosis and ophthalmoplegia [Campbell, 1979; Minton, 1990]. 
1. 7.1. 5. Renal Failure 
Renal failure is an important complication of snakebite. It is present with poisoning of 
Viperinae, Crotalinae and sea snakes. The pathogenesis is still unclear but a direct 
nephrotoxic effect, shock, haemolysis, haemoglobinuria, mioglobinuria secondary to 
rhabidomyolysis, and haemolytic-uraemic syndrome, may all playa part. The differences are 
probably due to venom variability, but evidence for all of the above mechanisms has been 
reported. Oliguric and non-oliguric renal failures have been obselVed. Proteinuria and gross 
or microscopic haematuria is consistently found in patients with renal involvement. In 
patients with renal failure a rise of blood urea, creatinine and potassium is common; acute 
pulmonary oedema and shock may also be present [George et ai., 1987; Nelson, 1989] 
l. 7.l.6.Pituitary Failure 
A few cases have been reported where this symptom is present. It was first described 
[Worn: 1958] in a patient bitten 7 years before by a Bothrops jararacussu. Russell's viper 
bites of southern India and Burma account for the majority of reported cases of pituitary 
failure [Eapen et ai., 1976; Majeed and Thomas., 1987; Tun-Pe et ai., 1987]. It is the only 
long term sequel to severe envenoming of Russell's viper [Warrell, 1989]. Brain 
haemorrhage is also present in some Bothropic accidents [Kouyoumdjian, 1990]. 
1 .8. Treatment 
The many signs and symptoms of snake poisoning have contributed to the large number of 
measures proposed by the layman and physicians for treatment. 
Since ancient times a variety of means and methods of treating snakebites has been used. 
The Roman Pliny (23-79 AD), recommended a draught of the victims own urine and also 
the snake's liver. In ancient Greece the ''priapus cervis" was prescribed, a solution in wine 
of a powder made from the sex organs of the red deer. A famous medicine, "Theriac", had 
snake flesh as a component, which was used to treat snakebite as well as a great number of 
other illnesses. It is believed to have been discovered by Mithridates, King of Pontus 
[Enge]mann, 1984]. 
The treatment of snakebite today is based on scientific principles. The clinical measures 
applied for the various snake poisonings are basically the same. Broadly these measures can 
be classified as: first aid measures, supportive measures and, the most successful and widely 
used, antivenom therapy. 
1.8.1. First Aid 
First aid measures are concerned with delaying the spread of the venom and, still advocated 
by some physicians, the removal of as much as possible of the venom from the bite site 
before total diffusion into the patient has occurred. 
The first was attempted by the use of a tourniquet [Fairley, 1929], and is today regarded by 
most authorities as deleterious to the patient's health. It exacerbates the local symptoms of 
haemorrhage and necrosis, usually leading to the need for amputation of the limb or part of 
it. The use of firm bandages over the bitten area, and over the length of the limb where 
possible, is the accepted measure, together with the immobilisation of the limb. Reassurance 
of the victim and rapid transport to the nearest hospital is important [Sutherland, 1975]. 
Removal of the venom, implying the need of incision or excision around the bite site, is still 
proposed, [Stewart et a/., 1981]. Studies have shown that these measures can remove up to 
35% to 50% of the venom if suction starts within minutes after the bite [McCullough and 
Gennaro, 1970; Shulov et a/., 1969]. Incisions might open the lymph channels facilitating 
the resorption of venom, [Leopold and Merriam, 1960], and if performed by untrained 
persons it might lead to nerve and muscle damage to the limb, resulting in severe 
consequences and even the need for amputation [Glass, 1976]. Cryotherapy was proved to 
bring no benefit in slowing venom adsorption, and studies showed that prolonged exposure 
to cold could result in gangrene of the bitten area or limb [Gill, 1970; McCullough and 
Gennaro, 1963; Moseley, 1966; Russell, 1979]. The effect of local application of heat or 
cold on the development of tissue necrosis in envenomed rats was recently studied [Cohen 
et a/., 1992]. The application of heat was intended to increase local blood-flow and 
accelerate diffusion of venom from the bite area to minimise local reactions. The authors 
observed no beneficial effect of heat or cold on the development of tissue injury after 
injecting rats with necrotising venoms. They argue that prompt use of antivenom is the 
measure of critical importance. 
1.8.2. Supportive Measures 
The many proposed measures aim to counteract specific venom effects. Intravenous fluids 
are essential in most cases. Oral fluids, specifically in cases of Elapid envenoming where 
pharyngeal paralysis can occur, are discouraged [Sutherland, 1975]. Coagulation defects 
must be looked for and treated according to need. Plasma, cryoprecipitate and platelets, can 
be used. Burgess and Dart, [1991] points out the risks of opting for this kind of treatment 
instead of antivenom therapy. 
1.8.3. Other Drugs 
Many of the toxic effects of snake venoms are produced by the interaction of venom 
components with the normal physiological systems of the victim, either by blockage, as in 
the case of neurotoxicity, or by activation, as in the coagulopathy syndromes. Based on this 
knowledge, it was proposed to counteract the toxic effects by using antagonistic drugs. 
Cholinergics have been suggested for treatment of the paralysis of elapid bites. Studies 
suggest both favourable and unfavourable results may ensue [Bannetjee et al., 1972; Pawar 
and Singh, 1987; Vieira et al., 1987; Warrell et al., 1983]. Zanin and Coelho, [1990] report 
the use of neostigmine for the treatment of bites by the Micrurus genera in Brazil. Watt et 
aI., [1986] showed that edrophonium improved the patient's visual and pulmonary 
conditions, following neurotoxic symptoms caused by the bite of Naja naja phillipinensis. 
However in electromyography studies with the venom of Micrurus laticollaris, 
endrophonium failed to abolished myasthenia-like patterns [pettigrew and Glass, 1985]. 
Pawar and Singh, [1987] concluded that once weakness is established to the point where 
assisted ventilation IS needed, neither anti-cholinergics nor antivenom will affect the 
outcome. 
Heparin has been considered where disseminated intravascular coagulation is present. The 
present medical opinion is that when the symptoms are caused directly by the venom, 
heparin is contraindicated [Sutherland, 1975]. The direct action of brazilian snake venoms 
on fibrinogen is not inhibited by heparin and its use to correct coagulation disorders should 
be avoided [Amaral et al., 1991]. The use of intravenous corticosteroids is discouraged by 
most authorities, the only controlled trial showed no benefit in their use, [Kurecki and 
Brownlee, 1987; Nelson, 1989]. Antibiotics should be used according to need, and usually 
of broad spectrum [Amaral et al., 1991; Kurecki and Brownlee, 1987; Nelson, 1989]. 
Plant extracts are used in popular medicine to treat snakebite. Duke [1985] and. Mors 
[1991], stated that 578 species of plants have been cited in the literature as having antidotal 
activity against snake venoms or some of their components. Water-soluble extracts or 
methanol extracts are used. In Brazil a popular medicine used to treat snakebite, known as 
"Especifico Pessoa", is sold in the North and Northeast of the country. The plant that gives 
origin to the extract is kept secret. Nakagawa et ai., [1982] isolated from the extract two 
compounds, cabenegrin AI and AIl thought to contain the active components. When 
injected i.v. (1.0 mglkg) in a beagle 15 minutes prior to the injection of B. atrox venom (2.5 
mg/kg, i.v.) it restored respiratory function, blood pressure and cardiac symptoms to normal 
in 60 to 90 minutes. AIl had similar effects as AI. Mors et al., [1989] reported the 
neutralisation of lethal and myotoxic activities of South American rattlesnake venom by 
extracts of the plant Eclipta prostrata. The authors noted that the plant has the same anti-
snakebite reputation in China. Of the extracts and compounds tested, 3 extracts and 2 
compounds (Active CH2Ch, Wedelolactone) completely abolished mortality and the other 3 
greatly reduced it in the experimental conditions used. The crude extract also inhibited the 
myotoxic activities of the venom both 'in vitro' and 'in vivo'. A large number of reports of 
plants extracts being tested under controlled conditions were recently reviewed [Martz, 
1992]. The author also suggests that such components or extracts, if proven effective 
against snakebite, could be used as first aid measures or as supportive treatment. 
1.8.4. Serum Therapy (Antivenoms) 
There are many reports in the literature concemmg the treatment of snakebite by 
antivenoms see Amaral et al., 1991; Boyden, 1980; Joseph-Ryan, 1983; Kouyoumdjian and 
Polizelli, 1988; Kurecki and Brownlee, 1987; Misra and Misra., 1982; Nelson, 1989; 
Persson and Irestedt, 1981; Pugh and Theakston, 1987; Rosenfeld, 1971; Sherry, 1985; 
Sutherland, 1990; Wagner and Golladay, 1989]. Broadly, all classify the measures as: First 
aid and Medical treatment, the latter being supportive measures, and antivenom therapy. 
The decision on which of these measures to use is based on clinical observation of the 
patient and laboratory tests. 
Since the early work on antivenoms, [BraziL 1901; Calmette, 1894], the mortality and 
morbidity due to snakebite has decreased sharply in some countries [Warrell, 1992]. Serum 
therapy for snakebite is generally accepted as the most effective treatment. However good, 
the use of antivenom still has its problems and the decision to use it depends on the 
physician'S evaluation of the patient's clinical status, based on the observation of clinical 
signs of envenoming, local or systemic, and laboratory tests. With few exceptions most 
snake poisonings are graded as one of the following: 
1. No envenoming 
2. Minor - local reactions, no systemic signs, normal laboratory results. 
3. Moderate - increased local reactions, some systemic signs, abnormal laboratory 
results. 
4. Severe - marked local reaction, severe systemic SIgnS, abnormal laboratory 
results. 
Antivenom should be given intravenously (i.v.), usually diluted in normal saline or other 
isotonic solution. The subcutaneous or intramuscular routes are not indicated because of the 
slow adsorption of the antivenom [Campbell, 1979; Sutherland, 1975]. 
The amount of antivenom to be administered will depend on the severity of the bite and type 
of venom The return of the coagulation time to normal and the cessation of gum bleeding 
are used as signs of treatment efficacy in some types of poisoning. In general there is no 
definite treatment scheme and the doses vary for each case. A report containing some dose 
recommendations for various species [Nelson, 1989] shows great variation, from 3-4 vials 
for all sea snakes. Tu [1987] suggests 10-40 ampoules (100 to 400 ml) for severe Crotalid 
envenoming. In Brazil the suggested initial doses for Bothropic envenoming are: 4 - 12 
ampoules (40 to 120 ml) for minor to severe respectively. For Crotalic bites, all cases are 
considered moderate to severe and the doses are: 15 - 30 ampoules (150 to 300 ml) or more 
ampoules respectively. For the Lachetic accidents 8 - 16 ampoules, (80 to 160 ml); and for 
elapidic enough to neutralise 150 mg of venom [Amaral et al., 1991]. 
Antivenom should be gwen as early as possible, in the right dose and through the 
appropriate route [Chippaux and Goyffon, 1992; Minton, 1990; Rosenfeld, 1971]. To be 
most effective it should be used within 4 to 24 hours of the bite. Dwivedi et al., [1989] 
report a case of a 19 year old man who was admitted to hospital 8 days after the bite, 
showing signs of envenomation (bleeding from multiple sites, echymoses, melenae and frank 
hematuria). The administration of 40 ml of antivenom diluted in 500 ml of isotonic solution, 
promptly reversed the course of envenoming. In cases of Coral snake and Krait 
envenoming, antivenom should be given before signs of envenoming develop, because these 
venoms are difficult to neutralise after binding to the myoneural junction [Minton, 1990]. 
Hypersensitivity reactions are a common side effect of serum therapy. Measures to minimise 
risks of early reactions differ among authorities. Skin and conjuctival tests are proposed by 
some [Amaral et aI., 1991; Boyden, 1980; George et aI., 1987]. In Australia they are 
regarded as unreliable, delaying urgent therapy. Use of appropriate premedication 
(adrenaline) before infusion of antivenom is advocated for the prevention of an adverse 
reaction [Sutherland, 1990]. 
Antivenom therapy if necessary, should not be withheld even if the patient has a history of 
horse serum allergy or is positive on the sensitivity test. The benefits far outweigh the 
adverse reactions and these can be properly controlled in a hospital environment [Burgess 
and Dart, 1991; Otten and McKimm, 1983]. Early reactions, i.e. anaphylaxis, can be 
controlled by epinephrine and antihistaminics; late reactions, i. e. serum sickness, can be 
ameliorated with steroids and antihistaminics [Burgess and Dart, 1991]. 
Despite its 90 year history, antivenom therapy remains largely empirical [Cardoso, 1990; Ho 
et ai., 1986]. In a controlled study, patients with Bothropic envenoming were divided into 
two groups: minor and moderate envenoming. Half of the patients with minor envenoming 
received 4 ampoules and the other half received the same number but with half the protein 
content per ampoule. The same scheme was adopted for the moderate group but each 
patient received 8 ampoules of antivenom instead. The results showed no difference in the 
clinical outcome of the treatment between the groups [Castro et ai., 1990]. 
In another study, patients were separately treated for Bothropic bites with antivenom from 
the 3 different producers in Brazil. The incidence of early reaction was 87% for the 
But ant an antivenom, 36.5% and 56% for the Vital-Brazil and FUNED antivenoms 
respectively [Dias da Silva et aI., 1993]. This seems to confirm reports that patients are 
probably receiving excessive doses of highly efficient antivenom, increasing the incidence of 
early anaphylactic reactions [Theakston, 1992]. 
Antivenom is the only specific treatment for snakebite in most parts of the world. They are 
clinically effective against haemostatic disorders, hypotension and post-synaptic 
neurotoxicity, but are much less effective against pre-synaptic neurotoxicity, nephrotoxicity 
and local necrosis [Warrell, 1992]. 
Further studies on the kinetics of envenommg and treatment of snakebite, on the 
immunology of venom toxins, antivenoms and on the mechanisms of toxicity should 
improve treatment, reduce reactions, and minimise mortality and morbidity. 
1.9. Diagnosis of Snake Bites 
Snakebite by members of the Crotalinae Subfamily are usually medical emergencIes 
requiring immediate attention and the exercise of considerable judgement by the physician. 
Delayed or inadequate treatment may result in tragic consequences for the patient. Before 
any treatment is given, it is essential to establish a working diagnosis. It must be 
remembered that not all snakes are venomous and that not all venomous snakebite result in 
envenomation. Hyperventilation, weakness, anxiety, and nausea can be mistaken for 
poisoning. Unnecessary treatment may cause discomfort to the patient and/or provoke 
serious complications, [Russell, 1979]. 
To date, the diagnosis of snake venom poisoning is based on the presence of local or 
systemic signs and fang marks. These are often imprecise and only the positive identification 
of the offending snake by trained persons can confirm without doubt the diagnosis. 
The clinical manifestations, local or systemic, from which a clinical response to snakebite is 
made is dependent upon a number offactors, mainly; 1) the age and size of the victim; 2) 
the nature, location and depth of bite; 3) the amount of venom injected; 4) the species and 
age of snake involved; 5) the victim's sensitivity to the venom However, some local or 
systemic signs are more frequently observed within a family or genus of snakes, and can be 
used as guidelines to the diagnosis and grading of the severity of the envenoming. 
The diagnosis of snakebite through clinical symptoms is used in most countries of the 
world, even in Australia, the only country known to be using a diagnostic kit [Boyden, 
1980; George et aI., 1987; Joseph-Ryan, 1983; Kurecki and Brownlee, 1987; Misra and 
Misra., 1982; Nelson, 1989; Pugh and Theakston, 1987; Sherry, 1985; Sutherland, 1975; 
Talpers and Bergin, 1985; Warrell, 1989]. In countries where there is availability of 
polyvalent antivenom this proves to be the most successful empirical treatment irrespective 
of species diagnosis. 
In Brazil, a set of basic rules for the clinical diagnosis of snakebite has being laid down by 
Rosenfeld, [1971] in his extensive review of the "Symptomatology, Pathology and 
Treatment of Snakebite in South America". Venoms were classified by their 
physiopathologic activity, which would elicit specific signs and symptoms. The use of such 
criteria provides the ability to identity the genus or possibly the species of the offending 
snake. Snakes from the Bothrops and Lachesis genera have venoms classified as Proteolytic 
and Coagulant; from the Crotalus genera, Haemolytic and Neurotoxic, and from the 
Micrurus genera, Neurotoxic. Based on this classification a differential diagnosis for 
envenomation can be made, (Table 1.2): 
T bl 1 2 Diffi . ID' a e erentla lagnOSIS 0 fE f bBzili V nvenoma Ion )v ra an enoms 
Venom Type Local Neurotoxic Methemo- Haematuria Incoagulable 
Reaction Facies : globinuria blood 
Proteolytic & ++ - - + ++ 
Coagulant 
Haemolytic & - + ++ - -(+) 
Neurotoxic 
Neurotoxic - ++ - - -
The severity of snakebite of different venom types can be classified as follows (Table 1.3): 
Table 1 3' Cl ifi f ass ca Ion 0 fS 'E .vmotoms m nvenommg bv Brazilian Snakes 
Venom Type Mild Cases Serious cases Severe cases 
Intensive local reaction, 
Proteolytic Small local reaction, Evident local reaction, incoagulable blood, 
+ coagulable blood incoagulable blood haematuria, generalised 
Coagulant I pain, prostration 
Neurotoxic facies, 
Haemolytic Absent neurotoxic fa- Neurotoxic facies, Methemoglobinuria, 
+ cies, nonnal urine methemoglobinuria generalised pain, 
Neurotoxic agitation or torpor 
Neurotoxic facies, thick 
Neurotoxic Absent neurotoxic fa- Neurotoxic facies, salivation, difficulty in 
cies, local paresthesia paresthesia over the swallowing and 
entire extremity speaking, prostration, 
unconscIOusness 
The local signs for the Proteolytic and Coagulant venoms are: pain, erythematous oedema 
and echimoses, haemorrhagic phlyctema (possibly) and necrosis. General symptoms are: 
dizziness, nausea, uneasiness, bilious or bloody vomitus, haematuria and melena, epistaxis 
or gengival haemorrhage. 
For haemolytic and neurotoxic venoms, the local symptoms are: strong pain immediately 
after bite, local paresthesia and anaesthesia. Oedema rare, frequently no apparent lesion at 
the site of the bite. General symptoms: visual disturbances (ophthalmoplegia) and 
blepharoptosis, neurotoxic facies and loss of equilibrium In serious cases, agitation, bilious 
vomitus, delayed pupillary reflexes, prostration and coma, mydriasis, methemoglobinuria 
and progressive anuria may occur. 
For neurotoxic venoms, the local symptoms are: pam, absence of oedema or any local 
reaction, progressive paresthesia and drowsiness. General symptoms: Ophthalmoplegia and 
neurotoxic facies. Loss of equilibrium, thick salivation, torpor. 
These guidelines are still used in Brazil with little modifications. The Department of Health 
of the Sao Paulo State issued a manual in 1984 for the treatment of human envenoming by 
poisonous animals. Apart from the inclusion of snake morphologic characteristics to aid in 
the identification of snakes and their geographical distribution, the method for the clinical 
diagnosis of snakebite are those described by Rosenfeld, [1971]. Similarly the Brazilian 
Ministry of Health issued in 1991 [Amaral et ai., 1991], a Manual for the Diagnosis and 
Treatment of Snakebite, where the same methods proposed by Rosenfeld are used with 
minor modifications due to updated information on the snake venom's toxic activities. The 
diagnostic table for the Brazilian snakebite accidents in the manual is as follows (Table 1.4): 
T bl 14 D st T bl fB zili S k b A d a e . lagnO IC a eo ra an na e lte CCI ents . 
Snake genus Venom activities Immediate signs and Late symptoms 
symptoms hours after the bite) 
(up to 6 hours after the bite) 
Proteolytic Pain, oedema, erythema. Blisters, ed::tymoses, 
Bothrops Coagulant Evident local readioos Increased blood coagulatien necrOSlS, oliguria and 
Hemonhap;ic time, Haemonhages. Shock. * anuria (acute renal failure) 
Proteolytic Few studied cases: clinical manifestat.ioos similar to 
Lachesis Coagulant Evident local reac.tioos Bothrops makebite, with additienal sigps of vagal 
Hemonhagic stimulatien (Slow heart beat, hypotensien and 
"Neurotoxic" dianhoea). 
Discrete or absent local Neurotoxic facies, Ophtalmq>lagia. Reports of acute 
"Neurotoxic" reac.tioos respiratory deficiency in severe cases 
Discrete or absent local General muscular pain. Red or brown WlDe 
readioos Red or brown urine. (Hemoglobinuria and 
Crotalus Myotoxic Discrete oedema en bite site. mioglobinuria ). Oliguria 
and anW1a (acute renal 
deficiency). 
Haemolytic Discrete or absent local Red urine 
readioos 
Coagulant Discrete or absent local Increased blood coagulatien time. Rare haemonhages. 
readioos 
Discrete or absent local Neurotoxic facies, diplq>ia, q>htalmq>legia, sialorreia, 
Micrurus Neurotoxic readioos difficulty en swallowing and early acute respiratory 
deficiency . 
(*) In bites caused by young Bothrops jararaca, oedema and pain at bite site may not be present. Coagulant 
activity is predominant. 
The same manual also includes morphologic characteristics of snakes and geographical 
distribution as an aid to diagnosis. 
Numerous authors have described differences in symptomatology after envenommg by 
snakes belonging to the same species from different geographical localities and also different 
age, and this is more evident from widely distributed species see [Chippaux et aI., 1991; 
Minton, 1990]. Young Bothrops jararaca snake venom has weaker proteolytic activity than 
the adult snakes. Local reactions may not be present [Amaral et aI., 1991; Rosenfeld, 1971]. 
Studies are being carried out to try to correlate the distance of fang marks in Bothrops 
jararaca bites, and the age of the snake, as this has importance in the prognosis [Jorge and 
Ribeiro, 1987]. 
The characteristic clinical symptoms for a given family, genus or species of snake are not 
always present in the accidents caused by the snakes belonging to them 
Tests for the detection of snake venoms in body fluids or wound aspirates have clear 
clinical, experimental and medicolegal implications [Cox et al., 1992; Currie et al., 1988; 
Minton, 1987; Ratanabanangkoon et al., 1987; Theakston, 1989b]. Bioassays and 
immunological tests have been used to show the presence of venoms or antivenom 
antibodies in many types of samples, and have been used for the diagnosis of snakebite in 
patients and post mortem material. 
1.9. 1. I.Bioassays 
Trethewie [1970] tried to identify snake venoms through bioassays of their neurotoxicity, 
and Okonogi et al., [1976] through the identification ofhaemorrhagic activity. Both assays 
proved expensive, time-consuming and non-specific. Eaker [1969] using chromatographic 
techniques and bioassay, (toxicity), identified cobra neurotoxin from the oedema fluid of a 
dead victim. 
1.9.2.lmmunological Assays 
1.9.2.1.Gel diffusion and electrophoretic assays 
Lamb [1902], using immunoprecipitation techniques, showed that cobra antiserum formed a 
precipitate with cobra venom but not with the venoms of Echis carinatus, a viper, and of 
Hoplocephalus curtus and Bungarus fasciatus, both colubrine snakes. This was the first 
report of the differentiation of snake species by immunological methods. Muelling et al., 
[1957] used the precipitin test for the first time to elucidate the cause of death of an 18 year 
old girl. Homogenate from the skin surrounding the bite was mixed with horse anti-cobra 
serum and the reaction was positive up to a dilution of 1:100, 000, 000. Yadlowski et al., 
[1980] used precipitin reactions to detect Viperidae venom on the material used by the 
victim to commit suicide. It was not possible however, to identify the venom's species. 
Greenwood [1974], used immunodiffusion and counter-current electrophoresis in a study of 
101 cases of snakebite and detected venom in 40 patients. The monovalent antivenoms were 
raised in rabbits and some were made specific by adsorption with appropriate freeze-dried 
venoms. Blister fluid, urine and sera were analysed. Twenty seven out of seventy four 
wound aspirates were positive and nine out of thirteen blister aspirates. No venom was 
detected in the 84 sera tested. Urine samples concentrated fifty-fold to a hundred-fold were 
employed on counter-current electrophoresis. Nineteen out of seventy six gave positive 
results. Samples from seven patients known to have had Naja nigricollis envenoming 
showed cross reaction against other Naja venoms. In 40 of 44 cases the results were 
confirmed on both assays. Immunoprecipitation techniques are recognised to lack sensitivity 
and rely on having the right antigen/antibody ratio to form a precipitate. This results in the 
need to use a series of dilutions of the reagents, which makes it time consuming and not 
reliable for routine clinical use. 
1.9.2.2.Radioimmunoassay (RIA) 
RIA for the detection of snake venoms was developed as a solid phase competitive assay 
[Coulter et aI., 1974]. Monovalent antibody to various snake venoms is adsorbed to a 
polystyrene tube or plate wells to form the solid phase. Different dilutions of known venom 
concentrations are labelled with 1251 and are added to the solid phase for the production of a 
standard curve. In the test, samples are incubated with the solid phase and, after washing, 
the labelled venoms are added. After washing again, the solid phase is counted for 
radioactivity. If the count is high it indicates that the samples contains no venom, if it is low 
the sample contains venom that competed for the antivenom, blocking the reaction of the 
labelled venoms. Radioimmunoassay was used [Sutherland, 1975] to detect venom in 
human tissue and fluids. Tiger snake venom was detected post mortem at the level of 
210 nglml in the serum of a child and at the levels of 20 nglml and 35 nglml from sera of 
two adults bitten by unknown snakes. Sutherland and Coulter, [1977] report 3 cases of 
suspected snakebite, one post mortem, where the competitive RIA detected venoms of 
Brown snake or Tiger snake in the samples. In two cases the administration of antivenom 
improved the condition of the patients. One major drawback in the competitive RIA was the 
variable 125I-labelling of the different crude venoms, and its multiple components, and the 
effect of the iodination on their antigenic sites. A new solid phase sandwich 
radioimmunoassay was developed [Coulter et at., 1978], where a range of antibody 
solutions of different specificity is bound to a solid phase (CH-Sepharose 4B) and reacted 
against unknown samples of venom. Uptake of venoms is demonstrated by reaction against 
125I-Labelled antibodies of the same specificity range as the bound ones. The presence of 
venom in the samples is measured by higher radioactivity counts than the negative controls. 
Pukrittayakamee, et a/., [1987] using a monoclonal antibody against the factor X activator, 
detecting Russell's viper venom in body fluids. Quantities of 4 ng/ml in urine and 51lglml in 
serum were detected. Radioimmunoassays were found by several workers to be sensitive, 
accurate and reproducible [Boulain et at., 1982; Grognet et at., 1986 and Mollier, 1987] but 
require technical expertise, expensive equipment and carry the dangers of handling 
radioisotopes, thus remaining more of a tool for research and forensic applications, than a 
routine test system. 
1.9.2.3.ELISA 
The adaptation of the Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay to snake venom detection was 
first performed [Theakston et at., 1977] using a double antibody sandwich assay. Using 14 
venoms and 5 antisera, homologous venoms were detected in concentrations of 1 to 5 nglml 
with minor cross-reactions. Venoms inoculated into rabbits at doses of 1 LD50 were 
detected in their blood collected at periodic bleedings after the venom inoculation. The time 
of the assay was 3 hours. Coulter [1980], developed a variant of the assay that allowed 
results to be obtained in 30 to 40 minutes. Monovalent antibodies were purified by Protein 
A chromatography and used to coat the plates and to prepare conjugates. Samples were 
swab eluates from bite sites and had to be diluted 112 to 11100 to overcome cross reactions. 
Incubation times of the samples could be cut down to as little as 1 minute but to 5 to 30 
minute as average. Samples were added to homologous and heterologous antivenom IgG 
and to normal IgG as a control. Tests were compared with RIA, yielding similar results. The 
authors attribute the greater specificity and sensitivity to the Protein A-purified IgG. 
An enzyme immunoassay system suitable for the diagnostic of snakebite in the field was 
reported [Hurrell and Chandler, 1982]. Glass capillary tubes were coated with rabbit IgG 
antibodies against one of the five immunologically distinct snake venoms from Australia. 
The tubes were joined together by a silicone rubber tubing and connected to a small syringe. 
The patient's samples, (urine, swab eluate, blood with anticoagulant, and serum diluted 112), 
were drawn into the tubes using a syringe. After an incubation period, washing buffer was 
drawn up in the same manner three times, and the conjugate was aspirated into the tubes. 
After another incubation period and wash, substrate was drawn up and the colour reaction 
obseIVed against a white background. A two year review of the use of this kit gave divided 
opinions. The authors, Hurrell and Chandler, [1982] supported the usefulness of the test 
and attributed the conflicting results to the use of blood samples instead of bite swabs. 
Sutherland [1982], disagreed with the authors, pointing out the unreliability of the test. 
Jamieson et a., [1989] reported that the kit confirmed the diagnosis of snake bite in only 
12.8% of the samples tested, including bite swabs, urine and blood. Theakston [1989b] and 
Cox et a., [1992] also point to the unreliability of the test and showed cross reactions 
between venoms of snakes belonging to different genera. 
Labrousse et al., [1988] reported an ELISA test for rapid and sensitive detection of venom 
antigens after an experimental bite of Vipera ammodytes. Results could be obtained in 15 
minutes, and 5 ng of venom per m1 of serum could be detected. However the cross-
reactivity obseIVed impaired its use in countries where snakes belonging to different genera 
coexist in the same areas. Cox et al., [1992], report a novel ELISA method which correctly 
identified snake venoms from 5 genera of medically important snakes from Australia. The 
two-antibody sandwich method detected levels of 10 ng/ml in laboratory trials. Clinical tests 
are being carried out. 
Tan et al., [1992c], used indirect and double-sandwich ELISA procedures for the detection 
of Malayan cobra (Naja naja sputatrix) and monocellate cobra venom. Extensive cross-
reaction was observed in both assays, specially against cobra venoms. The authors conclude 
that there is a need for more specific antibodies for the immunodiagnosis of Asian cobra 
bites. 
In situations where the most medically important snakes, responsible for around 900/0 of 
accidents, belong to the same genus [Amaral et al., 1991; Cardoso, 1990; Ribeiro, 1990], 
and extensive cross-reactivity is present between their venoms [Dias da Silva et a. 1989; 
Moura da Silva et al., 1990; Silles-Villarroel et al., 1974] it has proved more difficult to 
detect venoms or venom components specifically at species level [Barral-Neto et al., 1990]. 
To overcome the problems of cross-reactivity, researchers are producing antibodies, 
(polyclonal or monoclonal) against specific venom toxins. However, reports of such studies 
show that both polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies raised against purified toxins cross-
react with venoms of the same genus, the same family and even between members of 
different families [Lomonte et al., 1990; Mandelbaum, 1988; Weinstein et a., 1985]. 
1.10. Vaccination 
The idea of becoming immune to the effects of poisons and venoms is not recent. According 
to Russell [1988], it is not known when man first attempted to experiment with immunising 
himself or others. There are many accounts of snake venoms being used in various forms or 
preparations to treat or protect against diseases [Morris and Morris, 1965; Russell, 1988]. 
Mithridates VII, a Greek ruler and physician is recorded to have tried to immunise himself 
by drinking the blood of ducks, which he kept on a ration of one poison or another [RusseR 
1988]. 
The work of Sewall [1887] is the first recorded to have experimented in a controlled 
manner on active immunisation with snake venoms, originating the studies on vaccination 
against snake bite. His inoculation of sub lethal and then increasingly lethal doses of the 
venom of Sistrurus catenatus catenatus, diluted in glycerine, into pigeons, resulted in the 
immunity of the pigeon against lethal doses of the venom Kaufinann [1889], using the 
venom of Vipera berus, obtained similar results. 
Other workers followed and Haast and Winer, [1955] reported that following a series of 
injections of venom of the Cape cobra, (Najajlava), the subject tolerated an injection of 40 
mg of venom with no ill effects. Weiner [1961] reported a successful immunisation of a 
professional snake handler against the venom of Notechis scutatus after a series of injections 
over a 13 month period. In an interesting experiment, Flowers [1963] immunised himself 
against the venom of Naja naja, injected in sodium alginate as adjuvant. He was later bitten 
by a Naja naja and suffered no systemic symptoms although necrosis developed in the bite 
site. The first large scale trial in humans was carried out [Sawai and Kawamura, 1969] with 
43,446 volunteers receiving the toxoid of Trimeresurus jlavoviridis. The results suggest 
that the toxoid was efficient in preventing local lesions. Sawai [1979], reviews the studies 
on vaccination with snake venom Many methods for venom detoxification in one way or 
another were able to confer different levels of immunity to the animals tested, [Christensen, 
1979], and some have been proposed as suitable for human vaccination. New et al., 1984, 
immunised mice with the venom of Echis carinatus entrapped into liposomes. One year 
after the immunisation the mice were challenged with a minimum lethal dose of the venom 
and the results demonstrated a level of protection acquired by the immunised animals. Later, 
Daniel et aI., [1986], detoxified the venom of the South American rattlesnake, Crotalus 
durissus terrificus, by stepwise iodination of the venom with non-radioactive iodine. The 
detoxified venom was capable of eliciting an immune response in mice and rabbits, affording 
protection against lethal doses of the venom Heneine et ai., [1988], applied the same 
iodination method to achieve similar results with the venom of Bothrops jararaca. Sawa~ 
and Kawamura, [1969] reports on a large scale trial of the active immunisation of monkey 
and human subjects with the Russell's viper venoid. Immunised monkeys withstood 
intramuscular challenge with 2 mg/kg of the crude venom often weeks after the 
immunisation. Sawai and Kawamura, [1992] report on their studies of cobra venom toxoid; 
the venoms of Naja naja atra, Naja naja kaouthia and Naja naja naja, were detoxified by 
the formalin method. Rabbits, guinea pigs and mice were immunised with the toxoid. Tests 
showed an antivenom activity in the serum of the animals and, when challenged with doses 
of the crude venoms, immunised animals demonstrated a much higher survival rate 
compared with the control group. In contrast with bacterial and viral infections, where there 
is an incubation period before the onset of the disease allowing time to mount an efficient 
immune response, the toxic effects of snake venoms begin in minutes and can kill in hours. 
It is doubtful whether venom immunisation could elicit an adequate and maintained level of 
circulating antibodies able to neutralise the venom in the short period of time required 
[Warrell, 1992]. However, as some authors suggest, the active immunisation of snake 
venoms could be of value in situations where minor envenoming occurs and also in reducing 
the volumes of antivenom when treatment is required 
1.11. Aims of the study 
The initial objective of this study was to identify and try to isolate species-specific antigens 
in the venoms of B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, and B. ailernalus, and to study the possibility 
of applying these antigens in the generation of species-specific antivenoms capable of 
identifying their homologous venoms species-specifically. This was extended with the 
inclusion of the venoms of B. atrox, B. neuwiedi, B. coliara and L. mula. 
The second objective was to develop immunoassays for the species-specific identification of 
the above venoms based upon the detection of the species-specific venom antigens. 
2. MATERIAL AND METHODS 
2.1. MATERIAL 
2. 1 . 1 . Animals and Chemicals 
All animals were from the animal house of the Department of Immunology of the University 
of Birmingham All animals received humanitarian treatment according to the guidelines 
contained in the Instruction for Contributors found in issue no.l of all volumes of 
TOXICON (since 1992). The number of animals was kept to a minimum. Balb/c mice were 
of both sexes, 2 to 3 months old. For the preparation of antisera, New Zealand rabbits were 
used at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine. I am indebted to Dr. R. G.D. Theakston 
and Dr. G. D. Laing for the rabbit immunisations. 
A detailed list of chemicals, suppliers and recipes are included in Appendix ll. The chemicals 
used, unless otherwise stated, were from Sigma 
2.1.2. Venoms 
Venoms used were from Brazilian snakes, either from a pool of venoms from snakes of the 
same species, or milked from individual snakes, as specified below. Venoms were obtained 
from the Instituto But ant an (Sao Paulo, SP) and Funda~ao Ezequiel Dias (FUNED), Belo 
Horizonte, MG. The venom of B. cotiara was a gift from Prof Ibrahim F. Heneine, 
(Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG). Complete addresses of these 
Institutions is given in Appendix ll. 
1) Venoms from a pool were: 
Genus Bothrops: B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, B. alternatus, B. atrox, B. moojeni, 
B. neuwiedi, B. cotiara. 
Genus Lachesis: L. muta 
Genus Crotalus: C. durissus terrific us and C. durissus collineatus. 
2) Venoms from individual species: 
Genus Bothrops: B. jararacussu, B. neuwiedi, B. moojeni. 
2.1.3.Antivenoms: mouse monovalent and horse polyvalent 
Monovalent antivenoms were produced by injecting rabbits with a pool of venoms from a 
single species, and were kindly supplied by Dr. R. G. D. Theakston, Liverpool School of 
Tropical Medicine. 
The polyvalent antivenoms used were the commercially available antibothropic antivenoms 
obtained from the Instituto Butantan, SP, Brazil and Fundayao Ezequiel Dias, MG, Brazil 
and were produced in horses by injection of a pool of venoms as described by Theakston et 
aI., [1991]. 
2. 1 .4. Preparation of antibody conjugates 
Enzyme antibody conjugates can be prepared by covalent coupling of antibodies to 
enzymes. A large variety of enzymes can be coupled to antibodies allowing many 
applications in immunohistochemical staining, immunoblotting and enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Enzyme antibody conjugates have been used for the 
quantitative or qualitative assay of biological of substances via enzyme-substrate reactions 
that yield a measurable colour [Avrameas, 1969]. 
2. 1.4. 1. Anti-Rabbit IgG-HRP conjugate 
The method described [Wilson et al., 1978] was used here. Briefly, 7.0 mg of Horseradish 
peroxidase (HRP) dissolved in 1.0 ml of distilled water, was activated by the addition of 0.2 
ml of freshly prepared 0.1 M solution of sodium m-periodate in distilled water. The mixture 
was gently mixed by rotation for 20 min at room temperature (R T) and subsequently 
dialysed overnight in a large excess (3 litres) of 1.0 mM sodium acetate buffer pH 4.4 at 
40C. The pH of this mixture was raised to pH 9.0 - 9.5 by addition of 20 JlI of 0.2 M 
sodium carbonatelbicarbonate buffer pH 9.5. To this, 14 mg of Sheep IgG anti-rabbit IgG 
(The Binding Site, Birmingham, England), was added immediately, dissolved in 1.0 ml of 
the carbonatelbicarbonate buffer pH 9.5. After a mixing period of 2 hours at room 
temperature, 100 JlI of freshly prepared sodium borohydride solution, 4.0 mg/ml, in distilled 
water, was added and the mixture was left to stand for 2 hours at 4C. Then the mixture 
was dialysed overnight in a large excess ofO.l M borate buffer pH 7.4. It was aliquoted and 
frozen at -20C. The conjugate was titrated and used at 1:20,000 dilution in the ELISA and 
at 1:5,000 in the immunoblot assays. These dilutions were determined in preliminary trials. 
2. 1. 4. 2.Alkaline phosphatase conjugates 
These were kindly supplied by Dr. David Theakston. The conjugates were rabbit 
monovalent antivenom IgG's conjugated to alkaline phosphatase and were used at 1: 500 
and 1: 50 dilutions in the ELISA tests. 
2.1.5. Preparation of immunoadsorbents 
Many cross-linking agents have been used to prepare water insoluble protein polymers 
employed as immunoadsorbents. Of these, glutaraldehyde allows the preparation of 
effective, stable and specific immunoadsorbents. Glutaraldehyde is known to react mainly 
with E-amino groups of peptides, specially those on lysine. Optimal insolubilization is 
achieved around the isoelectric point of each protein and at high concentrations. The 
antigen or antibody binding capacity is best preserved at pH 5.0. In order to reach high 
insolubilization rates and preserve immunoreactivity of insolubilized proteins, bovine serum 
albumin (BSA), with an isoelectric point around 4.9 and many lysine residues, is used to 
assist in the insolubilization of proteins. At pH 5.0, BSA is insolubilized and acts as the 
insoluble supporting matrix. Cross-linking agents are also employed for the introduction of 
active groups into an insoluble matrix which can subsequently be used for the 
immobilization of proteins. A high concentration of glutaraldehyde allow for the reaction of 
one of its aldehyde groups to react with free amino residues present in polyacrylamide gels. 
The other free aldehyde groups can than combine with the protein of interest, added 
subsequently. Immunoadsorbents can be used to purify antigens or antibodies [Ternynck et 
aI., 1976]. 
2.1.5.1.Glutaraldehyde adsorbents 
2.1.5.1.1.Adsorbents with equal amounts of venom 
Adsorbents were used to remove cross-reacting antibodies in the various antivenoms 
studied. Thus the venom adsorbent used to remove the cross reacting antibodies out of the 
anti-B. jararaca antivenom, was composed of a mixture of all venoms except the B. 
jararaca venom, and were tested for crossreactivity against the other Bothrops venoms 
studied. The method followed was a variation of that described by Ternynck et al., [1976], 
developed by Catty et al., [1988]. Venoms (5 mg each) in volumes of 0.1 ml in 0.2 M 
phosphate buffer, pH 7.0 were mixed together in a small flask. 1.0 ml of 2.5% 
glutaraldehyde solution was added dropwise with constant stirring. Then, the mixture was 
left standing at room temperature for 3 hours, as the gel formed. The gel was mashed to 
fine particles with a metal spatula and washed copiously with water by mixing and 
centrifuging at 4,000 g for 30 min at 4 DC, followed by 3 washes with 0.2 M phosphate 
buffer pH 7.2. The gel was mixed with 0.1 M glycine-HCl buffer, pH 3.0 for 15 min, 
centrifuged as above. The supernatant was removed and the gel washed with PBS until the 
pH reached 7.4. Reactive sites were quenched with 1.0% (w/v) BSA in PBS (equal volume 
to gel) for 2 hours at room temperature and the adsorbent was washed as above. The 
adsorbents were stored at 4 C in PBS with 0.1 % (w/v) sodium azide. 
2.1.5.1.2.Adsorbents with optimal amounts of venom 
The adsorbents were prepared with optimal amounts of each venom based on a 
crossreactive index derived from ELISA cross-reactivity studies (see Appendix IV). The 
insolubilization method used was that of Ternynck et al., [I976]. The total amount of 
venom was 20 mg and of BSA 80 mg in a volume of 2.0 ml (to keep concentrations 
between 40 to 50 mg/ml and a BSAIantigen ratio of 4: 1) of 0.2 M sodium acetate buffer pH 
5.0. Then, 0.2 ml of a 2.5% glutaraldehyde solution was added drop wise with constant 
stirring. The flasks were allowed to stand for three hours at room temperature. The gel 
formed was mashed into small particles with a metal spatula washed three times with PBS 
by mixing and centrifuging as above. Then the gel was mixed with 0.2 M HCl-glycine pH 
2.8 for 10 min. After centrifugation the pH was raised to pH 7.0 with 2.0 ml of 1M K 2HP04 
and the gel washed three times with distilled water. The remaining reactive sites were 
blocked with 1 M ethanolamine, pH 7.4, by overnight incubation at 4C. It was then 
washed with PB S as above. The adsorbents were then ready to use. 
2.1.6. Polyacrylamide gel immunoadsorbents: 
Venom adsorbents were also prepared using activated polyacrylamide gel beads 
[Temynck et al., 1976]. The venoms were used in optimal amounts as above. Twenty mg of 
the venom mixture was insolubilized within 10 ml of activated polyacrylamide beads (Biogel 
P2, from Biorad). The beads were hydrated for 24 h in distilled water and then washed 
several times by decantation with the same medium. The beads were activated by mixing 50 
ml of sedimented beads, 125 ml of distilled water, 50 ml of 25% glutaraldehyde, 25 ml of 
1 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, with overnight incubation at 37C. Next the beads were 
washed with distilled water by successive centrifugation at 4,000 g until no odour of 
glutaraldehyde was detected and the OD28Onm reading was zero. Venoms were then added to 
the "activated" beads in 20 ml of PBS, pH 7.4, and mixed overnight by rotation at room 
temperature. After successive washes with PB S until the OD28Onm reading was less than 
0.05, the gel was suspended in an equal volume of 1 M ethanolamine pH 7.4 and incubated 
for 2 hours at room temperature. The adsorbent was then washed with PB S and treated 
with 30 ml of 0.1 M Glycine-HCl buffer pH 2.8 for 15 min and neutralised with 30 ml of 1 
. After a further wash cycle with PBS, the adsorbents were stored at 4 C with 
0.01% (w/v) sodium azide. 
2.1.7.lmmunoaffinity column for the purification of B. jararaca-
specific components 
The characteristic of Protein A to bind to the Fc region of the IgG molecule of many species 
has been explored for the preparation of immuonaffinity matrixes. Antibodies with the 
desired specificity are bound to immobilised Protein A and a crosslinking agent is used to 
covalently "cement the IgG to the immobilised Protein A. This leaves the antigen binding 
portion of the immunoglobulin free to interact with the specific antigen in the mobile phase. 
The coupling of the purified absorbed rabbit IgG, anti-B. jararaca venom to Sepharose CL-
4B-Protein-A beads followed the method described in Harlow and Lane, [1988]. Briefly, 
2.0 mg of the purified absorbed antivenom IgG was added to 0.5 m1 of Sepharose CL-4B-
Protein-A beads in PBS and gently rotated for 1 hr at room temperature. The slurry was 
washed twice with 0.2 M sodium borate, pH 9.0, by centrifugation at 3,000 g for 5 min. 
The beads were resupended in the same buffer and dimethylpimelimidate (solid) was added 
to a final concentration of 20 mM. After 30 min of gentle mixing, the reaction was stopped 
by one wash with 0.2 M ethanolamine, pH 8.0, followed by 2 hr incubation with gentle 
mixing at room temperature with 0.2 M ethanolamine as above. After three washing steps 
with PB S, the gel was ready to use. 
2.1.8. Purification of 19G 
2.1.8.1.DEAE-Shepadex 
The isolation of immunoglobulins by DEAE-matrix is achieved by the principle of ion 
exchange. Antibodies have a more basic isoelectric point than the majority of other serum 
proteins and this fact can be explored in two ways for their isolation [Harlow and Lane, 
1988]. In the method used here the pH of the medium was kept around the isoelectric point 
of most antibodies and so it did not bind to the matrix. They can be recovered by 
chromatography or decantation of the supernatant after centrifugation. To achieve higher 
purity this method is often used in conjunction with a previous ammonium sulphate precipitation step 
of the serum innmmoglobulins. The two step method was used here. Briefly, rabbit monovalent 
antivenom serum (5 ml) was precipitated with 5 ml of saturated ammonium sulphate (SAS), 
added dropwise with constant stirring. The mixture was then centrifuged at 4,000 g and the 
pellet resuspended in 1.5 ml of 0.02 M phosphate buffer pH 7.2 and dialysed against the 
same buffer extensively. The whole of the dialysate was applied to a DEAE column 
equilibrated with the same buffer, of 19.0 ml column volume and eluted with 0.02 M 
phosphate buffer pH 7.2 at a flow rate of 20 ml/hour .. The eluate was monitored at A280nm 
by an LKB-Uvicord. The first peak was collected in aliquots of 5.0 ml and dialysed against 
water overnight, lyophilised and resuspended in 600 f.ll of PBS. Purity was tested by 
immunoelectrophoresis. The concentration of purified IgG was determined by the 
absorbance at A280run using the extinction coefficient [Harlow and Lane, 1988] for rabbit 
IgG, given below. 
E = 1.0 mg / ml = 1.35 at A
28Onm
1.0 em 
2. 1. 8.2. Ouantitation of rabbit IgG in sera 
The radial immunodifusion (RID) kit supplied by The Binding Site (Birmingham, UK) was 
used according to instructions for the quantitation of the IgG content in the rabbit 
antivenom sera. Samples diluted 1: 2 with PB S, and controls (supplied in the kit) were 
applied to an agarose gel containing anti-rabbit IgG and allowed to diffuse for 48 hours into 
the gel containing anti-rabbit IgG antibodies. Precipitation rings formed and their diameters 
were read using an illuminated reader from The Binding Site. The concentration of rabbit 
IgG was obtained from a reference table provided with the kit. 
2.1.9. Radiolabelling of sheep anti-mouse IgG 
Labelling of proteins with radioactive iodine is an effective method It is used for the 
assaying and screening of antibodies or antigens and for histochemical techniques. Iodide 
solutions are oxidised with Chloramine-T to produce iodine which attacks tyrosil residues 
mainly. These conjugates have been used in radioimmunoassays for the detection of venoms 
[Greenwood, et ai., 1974].The chloramine-T method [Greenwood et al., 1963] was used 
with some modifications. One hundred flg of purified sheep IgG anti-mouse IgG in 100 fll 
of 0.5 M phosphate buffer pH 7.6 was dispensed into a disposable plastic tube (Alpha Labs 
Limited) and to this was added 5 fll of 1251 in the form of Nal (sodium iodide for protein 
iodination, Amersham Radiochemicals), at 100 mCilml, followed by 25 fll of chloramine-T 
at 2.0 mg/ml in phosphate buffer. The mixture was mixed, and the tube was capped and 
incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature inside the hood. The reaction was stopped by 
addition of freshly prepared 50 fll of sodium metabisulphite at 2.5 mg/ml in phosphate 
buffer, and the mixture was applied to a small (5 ml) Shephadex G-25 column using 30/0 
BSA in 0.05 M Tris/HCI pH 8.0 as the eluting buffer. The first 2 mj])j)jtres of eluate were 
collected and iodine incorporation tested as follows. To 20 fll of the labelled antibody 
solution in a plastic tube, 1 ml of 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) and 100 fll of rabbit 
serum were added. After 5 minutes incubation at room temperature the tube was 
centrifuged in an Eppendorf centrifuge, at approximately 10,000 g for 5 minutes and the 
supernatant was removed. The supernatant and precipitate were then counted for 1. 0 
minute in a LKB Mini Gamma Counter. From these results the % of bound radiolabel was 
calculated as follows: 
Bound counts per minute (precipitate) = x 
Free counts per minute (supernatant) = y 
% bound label = x 100 
These results allowed an estimation of the labelling efficiency. 
2.2. METHODS 
2.2.1.Analytical Techniques 
2.2.1. 1. Immunoelectrophoresis 
This method combines the electrophoretic migration of antigens ill agarose with 
immunoprecitation in gel. It is used for the qualitative and/or quantitative assesment of 
antigens either as single or mixed molecules and is essential for assaying of antisera 
specificity. Antigens separated by electrophoresis are allowed to diffuse and react with 
antibodies applied in a trough parallel to the electrophoretic run. Precipitin arcs are seen 
where antigen and antibodies react. The method [Grabar and Williams, 1953] was used as 
modified by Catty and Raykundalia, [1988]. Briefly, 9.6 ml of 1.0 % agarose gel with 3.0 % 
PEG 6,000 in 0.05 M barbital buffer pH 8.6, was poured onto a glass plate of 8 x 8 cm 
Venoms, 5.0 Jlg each, in Barbital buffer, pH 8.6, were added to the wells in volumes of 5.0 
Ill. The electrophoretic run was performed at 12 rnA per plate for 2 hr. Antivenoms were 
added to troughs, each containing 750 Jlg ofIgG in 70 JlI and allowed to diffuse overnight 
at 4C. Gels were washed with four changes of saline, and then four changes of distilled 
water. They were pressed dry and stained with Coomassie Blue for 1 hour and destained 
until a clear pattern was observed. 
2.2.1.2.Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) 
Polyacrylamide gels have been used extensively as solid support for the separation of 
molecules under an electric field. The possibility of varying the pore sizes of the gel and 
therefore the sieving effect allows for the separation of mixtures of molecules of different 
sizes and/or isoelectric point. The use of detergents such as SDS and reducing agents such 
as p-mercaptoethanol (P-Me) make it possible for the comparison of molecular weights of 
the molecules and information about number of: and size of: aminoacid chains for each 
moiety. The anionic detergent SDS is used for an estimation of the molecular weights of the 
molecules being studied. When used in concentrations already established it confers similar 
negative electric charge to all molecules of the sample allowing for their separation by their 
molecular weight only [Hames and Rickwood, 1990]. 
2.2. 1.2. l.Non-SDS 
Without SDS the sample molecules are separated by their electrophoretic mobility. The 
method [Laemmli, 1970] was used but buffers did not contain either SDS or 2-J3Me. Runs 
were performed in slab gels of 7.5% acrylamide with a 3% stacking gel. 25 J.lg of each 
venom was added in a final volume of 2.5 J.lI of sample buffer without SDS. The 
electrophoresis was run for 1 hr, 50 min on a Pharmacia Mini-Gel apparatus with constant 
current of 30 mAo Gels were stained with Coomassie blue for 1 hour and de stained until a 
clear pattern was observed. Protein molecular weight markers (SDS-Blue), 4.0 J.lI in sample 
buffer, were used in separate lanes in sample buffer containing SDS (to allow for a good 
separation of these). These molecular weight standards were used as a reference. In some 
experiments the gels were not stained and were used in immunoblot experiments (see below 
2.2.1.3). 
In a second protocol, after the electrophoretic separation of the venoms the gels were not 
stained. Venom bands were cut out to be analysed for venom components carrying species-
specificity. In this experiment the gels were cast with blank combs where the samples are 
applied in the whole of the surface of the gel. Only one lane was used for the molecular 
weight standards. Venoms were then added, 450 J.lg in 75 J.lI of sample buffer. This is 
equivalent of 30 J-tg of venom per lane x 15 lanes. After the run, the lane containing the 
molecular weight standards plus a small adjacent area were cut off and stained. These were 
used as a reference for the removal of the wanted venom bands. The electrophoretic 
conditions were the same as for the first protocol. For this protocol four gels were prepared 
for each of the venoms tested in order to have more material for the subsequent analysis. 
The elution procedure is detailed under the Immunoblot section. 
2.2.1.2.2.SDS 
The Laemmli [1970] method was used under non-reducing conditions. Venoms were mixed 
in equal parts with the 2 times concentrated sample buffer and 25 f..lg of each was applied to 
thegel in volumes of2.5 f..ll. Slab polyacrylamide gels of 10% (w/v) with 5% (w/v) stacking 
gels were used and the electrophoresis run was carried out for 1.0 hours with 40 mAl2 gels. 
In separate wells, molecular weight markers SDS-7B and Dalton vn were applied in 
4.0,.t1/well. Staining for both gels was as described in Section 2.2.1.1. In some runs the gels 
were not stained but used in immunoblot experiments. 
2.2.1.3.Immunoblot 
The transfer of molecules to membranes such as nitrocellulose are employed after their 
separation through electrophoresis. The method is good for the assessment of antigens as 
single and mixed molecules and also for testing specificity of antisera. It offers advantages 
over immunoelectrophoresis such as higher sensitivity, better separation of antigens and 
estimation of molecular weights [Harlow and Lane, 1988; Catty and Raykundalia, 1988]. 
The venoms separated by PAGE were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes [Towbin et 
al., 1979] in a wet transfer apparatus Protean II from Bio-Rad. The transfer buffer was the 
non-SDS PAGE reservoir buffer with 20 % methanol (see appendix). Transfer was done 
over 50 min to 1 hr with a current of 0.18 A per 9 x 7 (cm) gel. Nitrocellulose membranes 
were then incubated with washingblocking buffer, PBS + Tween 0.1% (v/v ) overnight at 
4C. After washlng for 1 hr with four changes of the washing buffer the nitrocellulose was 
cut into strips as appropriate and the antivenoms, absorbed and non absorbed, were added 
at varying dilutions and incubated for 1 hr in PBS+ 0.1 % Tween 20. After washing, as 
above, the conjugate, sheep anti-rabbit IgG + HRP, was added at 1:5,000 dilution in 
blocking buffer and incubated at room temperature for 1 hr with mixing. Another washing 
step followed and the substrate was added, 10 mg of 3'3'-diaminobenzidine (DAB) in 20 m1 
of 50 mM Tris buffer pH 7.4 with 5 J.ll of 30 % H202. Colour was developed for 1 hour or 
less, depending on the intensity of the staining. The colour reaction was stopped by washing 
the nitrocellulose with PB S. The substrate was prepared by dissolving DAB in the substrate 
buffer and filtering through a filter paper prior to the addition ofH20 2. 
The transfer procedure was also used to elute samples out of polyacrylamide gel strips. For 
this the gel strips from two gels were eluted in dalysis bags with 2 m1 of transfer buffer. The 
transfer conditions were the same as described above in this section but it was carried out 
for two hours to ensure that all material had in fact eluted out of the gel strip. Next the 
pieces of gel were removed, the dialysis bags closed and dialysed overnight against distilled 
water (3 litres) with constant stirring. After this, the samples were removed from the bags 
and lyophilised. 
2.2.1.4. 2-Dimensional Immunoelectrophoresis 
This method combines the electrophoretic separation of antigensin a flat gel as a first step, 
(first dimension), with the rocket immunoelectrophoresis principle as a second step (second 
dimension), at an angle of 90 in relation to the first dimension. Separated antigens are 
electropohoresed into an antibody-agarose gel to produce a pattern of rockets [Laurell, 
1965]. The method has broad analytical value in examining the complexity of antigens and 
also for the study of antibody specificity. Single excised precipitin peaks can be used for 
immunisation, giving access to antigens which are difficult to purify. One of the variations 
of this method includes an intermediate gel placed between the first dimension gel strip and 
the second dimension gel, prior to running the second dimension electrophoresis. This gel 
can contain antigens or antibodies depending on the objectives of the experiment. 
Applications of the methodology can be found elsewhere [Axelsen, 1983]. 
2.2.1.4.1.With monovalent rabbit antisera in the second dimension 
The method [Laurell, 1965] was used as modified [Catty and Raykundalia, 1988]. Due to 
the small amounts of rabbit monovalent antivenom, this technique was performed in small 
glass plates, 5 x 4 cm The venom samples were added at concentrations of 5 Jlg/5 Jll in 
barbital buffer 0.05 M, pH 8.6, and electrophoresed in a 1.0 % agarose gel (as described 
above for the immunoelectrophoresis) for 1 hr and 50 min, at a constant 10 V/cm Strips of 
gel containing the separated bands were cut out and placed on another glass plate for the 
second dimension run. Two ml of agarose containing 5.75 mg of antivenom 
immunoglobulin at 56C was poured over the remaining surface of the glass plate. After 
allowing the gel to set for 5 min, they were placed in the electrophoresis tank for the second 
dimension run. Plates were run for 16 hours, (2.5 V/cm) at a perpendicular direction to the 
first run. Water cooling was used. Gels were washed with four changes of saline and then 
four of distilled water. They were pressed dried and stained as in Section 2.2.2.1.1. 
2.2.1.4.2.With intermediate gel 
In this experiment an agarose gel strip containing a mixture of antivenom immnunoglobulin, 
heterologous to the venom separated in the first dimension, was poured between the venom 
strip separating the first dimension gel and the second dimension gel (reference gel) 
containing the specific non-absorbed rabbit antivenom IgG. The concentration of each of 
the immunoglobulins in the intermediate gel varied from 3 times to 10 times greater that of 
the specific immunoglobulin in the reference gel. Control gels with saline in the intermediate 
gels were run simultaneously. The volume of the intermediate gel was 0.8 ml and of the 
reference gel, 1.2 ml. The conditions of the assay were as above. 
2.2.1.4.3.With polyvalent horse antisera 
These experiments were carried out in glass plates of 8 x 8 (cm). In the first dimension 9.6 
ml of 1 % agarose + 3% (w/v) of PEG 6,000 was poured onto the plates. 6 fll of a 50 mg/ml 
venom solution in barbital buffer was applied into the wells and electrophoresed at 80 
V/plate (10 V/cm) for approximately 3 hours. For the second dimension, gel strips were cut 
out and each one separately placed onto another glass plate, and 8.2 ml of agarose 
containing 0.5 ml of polyvalent antivenom (But ant an Institute) was poured over the 
remaining area of the glass plate and allowed to set. The second dimension, perpendicular to 
the first one, was run overnight at 20 V/plate (2.5 V/cm). Water cooling was used. Washing 
and staining were as in Section 2.2.1.1. 
2.2.1.4.4. With intermediate gel 
In this experiment an agarose gel strip containing a mixture of antivenom irnrnnunoglobulin, 
heterologous to the venom electrophoresed in the first dimension was poured between the 
venom strip separating the first dimension gel and the second dimension gel (reference gel) 
containing the specific unabsorbed antivenom The concentration of each of the 
immunoglobulins in the intermediate gel varied from 3 times to 10 times greater than that of 
the specific immunoglobulin in the reference gel. Control gels with saline in the intermediate 
gels were run simultaneously. The volume of the intermediate gel was 1.2 mI and of the 
reference ge~ 7.6 mI. The conditions of the electrophoresis run were as above. 
2.2.1.5.ELISA 
Enzyme immunoassays (e.g.: ELISA and Immunobloting) take advantage of the biological 
properties of two macromolecules, ezymes and antibodies. Antibodies are able to 
distinguish closely related compounds, and ezymes, biological catalysts, accelerate specific 
chemical reactions enormously and can be detected by adding substrate. The principle of 
enzyme immunoassays is to conjugate an ezyme to one of the immunoreactants, let the 
immunological reaction take place, add substrate, and determine the substrate-product 
conversion by the enzyme. The amount of product indicates how much enzyme-labelled 
immunoreactant is incorporated in the complex, thus, allowing a qualitative or quantitative 
measure of the immunoreactants. The assay can be performed on a variety of solid supports 
and many variations of the assay can be performed, such as: direct sandwich or indirect 
sandwich. The assay can also be competitive or non-competitive. The enzyme 
immunoassays have many applications and have been used for the study of infectious 
diseases, histology, parasitology, virology, and any other field where antigen and an specific 
antibody can be obtained. (Kurstak, 1986). In snake venom research enzyme immunoassay 
was first used by Theakston et al., [1977] 
2.2.1.5.1.Antigen capture ELISA 
Two protocols were performed. 
1) Rabbit IgGs that had been absorbed on their respective venom adsorbents, and which 
showed complete or increased species-specificity were used to coat ELISA plates at 40 
Jlg/ml in coating buffer (0.05 M Carbonate buffer, pH 9.6), in 100 Jlllwell. The plates were 
incubated overnight at 4 C. The plates were then blocked with blocking buffer for 1 hr at 
37C. Different venom solutions either in PBS or in normal human serum diluted to 1:50, 
were added in different concentrations to different wells containing the homologous or the 
heterologous coating IgG. After 1 hr incubation at 37 C, sheep anti-rabbit IgG conjugated 
to Alkaline phosphatase was added in blocking buffer (PBS + 5 % (w/v) low fat milk, 100 
Jlllwell was added, followed by another incubation step. Colour was developed with the 
appropriate substrate solution (10 mg ofN-p-nitrophenyl phosphate dissolved to 10 ml of 
substrate buffer). The optical density at ~05 nm was read, without stopping the colour 
reaction, on a Titertek ELISA reader. After the incubation step every addition of reagent 
was preceded by a washing step of 3 x 5 min with washing buffer and tapped dry. 
2) In the other experiment polyvalent anti-Bothropic horse IgG F(ab')2 was added in 
coating buffer to ELISA plates at 0.5% (v/v) and incubated overnight at 4C. After 
washing with saline + 0.05% (v/v) Tween 20, 3 times for 5 minutes each, the plates were 
blocked as above in protocol 1, and the venoms were added in different concentrations to 
different wells in incubating buffer and incubated for 1 hr at 37C. After washing, rabbit 
absorbed antivenoms were added to wells containing their homologous and heterologous 
venoms, incubated as above and washed again. Sheep anti-rabbit IgG conjugated to horse-
radish peroxidase, at 1:20,000 dilution in blocking buffer, was added to the plate and 
incubated as above. Following a washing step, substrate solution (10 mg OPD dissolved to 
25 ml in 0.15 M citrate buffer pH 5.0 + 5.0 JlI of 30% H20 2) was added and the colour 
developed for 30 minutes. The colour reaction was stopped with 50 flllwell of 20 % (v/v) 
sulphuric acid and the colour measured at ~92nm in a Titertek ELISA reader. 
2.2.1.S.2.Indirect Antibody ELISA 
Two assay protocols were performed. 
1) Different venom species solutions at graded concentrations (0.01 to 10 flg/ml), diluted in 
coating buffer, were coated onto ELISA plates, 100 Jlllwell, and left overnight at 
4 DC. After a washing step (see section 2.21.5.1), fixed or varying dilutions of venom-
affinity absorbed antivenom sera were added to different wells, 100 Jlllwell, in incubation 
buffer containing either the homologous or heterologous venom, and incubated for 1 hr at 
37 DC. Sheep anti-rabbit IgG, conjugated to horse radish peroxidase, was added at 1:20,000 
dilution in blocking buffer followed by another incubation step. Then substrate solution (10 
mg OPD dissolved to 25 ml in 0.15 M citrate buffer pH 5.0 + 5.0 JlI of 30% H20 2), was 
added and the colour reaction was stopped with 50 fll of a 20% (v/v) solution of sulphuric 
acid after 30 min. Optical densities were read at 492 nm using a Titertek ELISA reader. 
Between incubation steps, plates were washed with 3 changes of 5 min each, with 0.9% 
(w/v) saline + 0.5% (v/v) Tween 20. 
2) In the second protocol fixed concentrations of the different venoms (1 flg/ml) were 
coated separately onto ELISA plates as above. The remaining steps were as described 
above for the first protocol of this section. 
2.2.1.S.3.Inhibition ELISA 
Inhibition experiments were performed for each homologous system. Plates were coated 
overnight with venom of a single species (1.0 Jlg/ml) in coating buffer, 100 Jlllwell. The 
homologous non-absorbed rabbit antivenoms were titrated against the homologous venom 
by antibody capture ELISA and a dilution yielding an optical density of 1.0 at A280nm was 
used in this assay. A fixed volume of these antivenoms diluted in diluting buffer (2x final 
dilution) were separately added to different sets of test tubes which contained varying 
concentrations of one of the heterologous venoms or the homologous venom (2x final 
concentration) in a 1: 1 (v/v) ratio. The mixture was vortexed and 100 Illlwell was added to 
the ELISA plate coated with the homologous venom and incubated at 37C for 1 hr. 
Antiglobulin conjugate was added at 1:20,000 dilution and incubated as above. Substrate 
solution, was added and the colour developed for 30 min and stopped with a 20% (v/v) 
sulphuric acid solution, 50 JlIwell. Absorbance was read at At92nm in a Nunc ELISA reader. 
Between all the incubations the plates were washed three times for 5 min each with washing 
buffer and tapped dry. 
2.2.l. 6. Solid Phase Radioimmunoassay 
This method was used for the screening of the murine hybridoma clones for antibody. 
Microtitration plates with round bottoms were coated with 50 Illlwell of a 2.5 fl.g/ml venom 
solution overnight and washed three times for five minutes with washing buffer, PBS + 5% 
Foetal calf serum (FCA), and then blocked with blocking buffer, PBS + 3% BSA for 1 hr at 
37C. After a washing step, 50 fl.l of the supernatant of each clone was added per well and 
the plate incubated for 1 hr at 37C. After a second wash the radiolabelled anti-mouse Ig 
was added at 1:300 dilution and the plate was again incubated as above. Following another 
washing step the wells were counted for radioactivity in a gamma counter for 1 min each. 
2.2.l. 7. Affinity absorptions of antivenoms. 
Antivenom sera or purified antivenom-IgG, (2 ml) prior to absoIption were diluted 1:2 with 
PBS. The batch method was used and the absoIption step was done at room temperature 
for 2 hr in a rotating mixer. The adsorbents were then centrifuged at 4,000 g at 4C, for 30 
min. The supernatant was pippeted out and filtered through a 0.45 1lID, Mylex filter 
(Millipore) after each absoIption. The absorbed antivenoms were stored at 4 C until the 
next adsoIption step or until tested for cross-reactivity. Absorbed antisera or (IgG) showing 
species-specificity was aliquoted in Eppendorftubes and stored at -20C. Adsorbents were 
washed with 4 m1 of 0.1 M Glycine-HCI buffer, pH 2.3, three times for 10 min each. The 
pH was raised to pH 7.0 with 4 mI of 1 M K2HP04 and the adsorbents washed three times 
with PB S again. After the final PB S wash the adsorbents were ready for use. The same 
procedure was used with the polyacrylamide-gel adsorbents but the antivenom's volumes 
used for the absorptions were equal to 4 mI. 
2.2. 1. 8. Immunisation of rabbits with precipitin lines 
The 2D-IEP gels were analysed by dark-field illumination and the peaks showing species-
specificity were cut out of the gel with the help of a scalpel and a magnifying glass. They 
were placed separately in glass tubes containing 5 mI of PBS and washed repeatedly for 3 
days to remove non-precipitated or weakly associated antigens from the precipitate. After 
the washing step the gel was placed overnight in a freezer at -20C. After freezing, the 
agarose was liquefied by thawing. The volume was measured with the help of a pipette and 
mixed with the same volume of Freund's Complete Adjuvant (FCA) or Freund's Incomplete 
Adjuvant (FIA). The emulsions were injected subcutaneously into rabbits in volumes of 200 
Jll. The first injection was in FCA and the subsequent ones in FlA. The rabbits were injected 
subcutaneously once every two months and received a final boost 3 days after the final 
injection. The serum was analysed by ELISA for antivenom titre 10 days after an injection 
at the dilutions of 1:50, 1: 100, 1:500 and 1: 1,000 in PBS. The plate was coated with 
IJlg/mI of the specific venom, 100 J.1l1well. The alkaline phosphatase anti-rabbit IgG 
conjugate was used at 1: 1,000 dilution. All volumes were of 100 J.11. The immunisations and 
serum assays were performed at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine. Peaks 1, 2, 3 
and 4 of B. moojeni, peaks 2, 3, and 4 of B. atrox and peak 1 of B. neuwiedi were used. 
2.2. 1. 9. Immune complexes 
Immune complexes were formed with the absorbed rabbit antivenom sera. The 
concentration of species-specific antivenom IgG in the antisera was assumed to be 10% of 
the total IgG. The venom species-specific component was also assumed to be 100/0 of the 
total venom protein and it was used in a four fold excess of the antibody concentration. 
Antivenom and venom were mixed in PBS + 8% (w/v) PEG 6,000 to obtain a final 
concentration of 4% (w/v) PEG. The mixture was incubated for 1 hr at 37C and allowed 
to stand overnight at 4C. The solution was centrifuged at 10,000 g at 4 C and the 
precipitate washed by 3 additional centrifugation steps with 2 % (w/v) PEG 6,000. After the 
final wash the precipitate was resupended in 100 f.ll of PBS and mixed with 100 f.ll of either 
FCA or FIA and injected into mice. Typically, volumes of antivenom sera containing 50 J.,lg 
ofIgG were mixed with 200 f.lg of venom in a final volume of between 50-80 f.ll. The mice 
received four equal doses, intraperitoneally, one per week. The first in FCA and the other in 
FlA. The animals were tail bled before each injection for titration of the antivenom response 
by ELISA, using If.lg/ml of venom to coat the plates. Antivenom giving OD readings higher 
than 1.0 at dilutions > 1: 1,000 were considered good for spleen removal. 
2.2. 1. 10.Monoclonal Antibodies 
The method [Galfr6 and Milstein, 1981] as described in Brown and Ling, [1989] was used. 
Positive wells were cloned in HAT medium and some were grown as ascitic tumours in 
pristane-primed Balb/c mice. Clones were screened by Radio-immunoassay using C25I]-
Sheep anti-mouse IgG in 5 % foetal calf serum The fusion protocol and cell culture 
methods are given in Appendix ill. 
2.2.1.11.Affinity chromatography isolation of B. jararaca specific 
components 
One mI of a solution of B. jararaca venom, 10 mg/mI in PB S, was applied to an affinity 
column (anti-B. jararaca absorbed IgG bound to Protein A Sepharose CL-4B) and allowed 
to pass through by gravity. Column volume was equal to 0.5 mI. The column was then 
washed with a lOX column volume for each of the buffers: 0.1 M Tris pH 8.0 and 0.01 M 
Tris, pH 8.0. After the final wash the reading at A280nm returned to the base line and the 
bound antigen was eluted with 0.1 M Glycine-HCI pH 2.5. The eluate was collected in 
500 f.ll aliquots in tubes containing 50 f.ll of 1.0 M Tris pH 8.0. The OD of the eluate was 
read on a Pharmacia-LKB spectrophotometer at A28Onm  Six chromatography runs were 
performed with each 1.0 ml of venom being chromatographed twice. The pooled samples, 
in a final volume of 14 mi1liJitres were dialysed with distilled water and concentrated in an 
Amicon concentrator using a YM50 menbrane with a cut-off of 5.0 kDa, to final volume of 
1.0 ml in distilled water. The protein content was estimated by measuring the absorbance at 
A28Onm  One unit of absorbance = l. 0 mg/ml. 
2.2. 1. 12. Statistical Analysis 
The calculations were performed with the software SigmaStat, usmg the method of 
Student-Newman-Keuls Test for pairwise comparisons at p< 0.05. 
3. RESULTS 
3. 1. Introduction 
Snake venoms contain a complex mixture of protein components. Experiments were carried 
out in order to compare and analyse this complexity between the venom pool of each 
species and their immunoreactivity. 
3. 1 . 1 . Venom characterisation 
Polyacrylamide electrophoresis were performed in order to compare and analyse the venom 
patterns of all venom pools studied. In Fig. 3.1 (A) the electrophoretic separation was 
carried out in non-SDS and non-reducing conditions. It can be observed that the venom 
patterns are different for each specific venom pool. All venoms have components with 
electrophoresis mobility varying from low ( upper part of gel) to high (lower part of gel). 
Some venom species have clearly identified venom components with the same 
electrophoretic migration, as can be observed in lanes 1, 3, 4, and 7 regarding the stained 
band numbered 1. Similarly the venoms in lane 1, 3, 4, 6 and 8 share the protein stained 
band number 2. In lanes 5 and 6 the protein band number 3 seems to be shared only by the 
venoms of B. moojeni and B. neuwiedi. In lane 2 the stained band numbered 4 seem to be 
present only in the venom of B. jararacussu as no other venom show a sharp stained band 
with same electrophoretic migration. Bands with unique electrophoretic migration are also 
clearly observed in lanes, 1, 3 and 8 which are bands numbered 5, 7 and 6 respectively. In 
Fig. 3.1 (B) is shown the SDS-PAGE venom patterns obtained without reducing conditions. 
Again the complexity and differences between the stained pattern for each venom species is 
observed. All venoms display components within the range of high molecular weight (above 
70 kDa) and low molecular weight (below 24 kDa). There is a band of approximately 48.5 
kDa that is shared by all venoms. In lane 5 the B. moojeni venom do not show any 
components with molecular weight higher than 70 kDa. 
212  
116  
2 - 3 4 5 6 8 . *' ,. .; --
6 5 4 3 2 1 MW 
Figure 3.1 (A and B). Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of Bothropic venoms A: Non-
SDS. 25 ~g of each venom was fractionated in a 7.5 % gel. B: SDS. 25 ~g of each venom 
was fractionated in a 10% gel. Venoms for gels A and B: 1. B. jararaca, 2- B. 
'araracussu, 3- B. allernalus, 4- B. atrox, 5- B. moojeni, 6- B. neuwiedi, 7- B. cotiara, 8-
L. mula. MW are molecular weight standards. 
The results of both polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis separations show the complexity of 
Bothropic snake venom composition. The electrophoretic patterns in both experiments are 
different for each species. Many venom components from different species have the same 
electrophoretic mobility and molecular weight. The components with unique electrophoretic 
mobility obselVed in some venoms in Fig. 3.1 (A) cannot necessarily be interpreted as 
species unique products. Similar results were not obselVed in Fig. 3.1 (B) in the presence of 
SDS .. 
3.1.2.lmmunoreactivity studies of venoms and antivenoms. 
This part of the study was aimed at obtaining qualitative and quantitative data on the 
homologous reactivity and cross-reactivity of the venoms with monovalent antivenoms, and 
also to obtain some data on the antigenic similarities between the venoms studied. For this 
study, ELISA and immunoelectrophoresis methods were used. 
3. 1.3. Antibody capture ELISA 
The reaction of a monovalent antivenom with its homologous venom and with heterologous 
venoms was used in order to obtain information on the existence of antigenic similarities 
between the venoms. By looking at Fig. 3.2 (A-D) and 3.3 (A, B) it can be obselVed that in 
all cases the antivenoms broadly dilute to give equivalent dilution CUlVes indicating a high 
degree of cross-reactivity. Some antivenoms react more strongly with heterologous venoms 
than with the homologous venom This can be obselVed with the antivenoms against B. 
jararaca and B. jararacussu venoms (Fig. 3.2 (A) and (B) respectively). 
2.01.-
. .'" 0 B. jararaca 
D  B. jararacussu 
\\ V B. alternatus 
~ T B atrox 
L\ ~\ D B. moojeni 
6 6 B. cotiara ~
\ \  B. neuwiedi 
~~>-\\,~ 
'",* ~ ~ \. 
\v~ 0\ 
0.0 ~~~~~L~~~t-J 
0,6 1,2 2,5 5,0 10 20 40 80 160 
Reciprocal of antivenom dilution X 105 
0,61,252.5 5.0 10 20 40 80 160 
ReciDrocol of ontivenom dilution x 10
2.0 r---------------
0,61,22,55,010 20 40 80 160 
Reciprocal of ontivenom dilution X 10.3 
a . 0 '----'-----'---'------'---'------'----'-----=--
0,6 1,25 2,5 5,0 10 20 40 80 160 
Reciprocal of antivenom dilution x 1 0
gure 3.2 (A-D). Indirect Antibody ELISA showing the reactivity of non-absorbed rabbit monovalent 
tivenoms with homologous and heterologous venoms. The IgG concentration for all antivenoms 
~s 7.0 mglml. Antivenoms: A: anti-B. jararaca; B: anti-B. jararacussu; C: anti-B. alternatus; D: 
ti-B. atrox. Venoms are as listed in plate A. 
2.0 r----------------., 
1.5 \ 
0 B. jararaca 
 B. jararacussu 
V B. alternatus 
6, \ T B. atrox 
\ \ 0 B. moojeni 
~ 1.0 
~\  B. neuwiedi 
~ ~ /', B. coliara 
\~~ -o o o 
01 ... 
0.0 L--~-L--.l_1-~~~~~~~ 
0,6 1,2 2.5 5,0 10 20 -40 80 160 
Reciprocal 0' antivenom dilution X f 03 
0,61,252,5 5,0 10 20 40 80 160 
Reciorocoi of ontivenom dilution x 10
2.0 r---------------
1.5 \ 
~ 1.0 
V~\6,  
v~. O~ 
::::;: 
0,61.22.55,010 20 40 80160 
Reciprocal 0' ontivenom dilution X 103 
0.6 1.25 2,5 5.0 10 20 40 80 160 
Reciprocol of onlivenom dilution x 1 0
Figure 3.2 (A-D). Indirect Antibody ELISA showing the reactivity of non-absorbed rabbit monovalent 
antivenoms with homologous and heterologous venoms. The IgG concentration for all antivenoms 
was 7.0 mglml. Antivenoms: A: anti-B. jararaca; B: anti-B. jararacussu; C: anti-B. a/ternatus; D: 
anti-B. atrox. Venoms are as listed in plate A. 
2.0 A B 
o B. jarareca 2.0 
 B. jararecussu 
E V' B. allernalus E c 1.5 
N c 1.5 
(j) ... B. alrox N 
'<t (j) 
 B. neuwiedi 
1.0 [f) C 1.0 
(]) 6 B. coliare c 
0 (]) 
"0 "0 0 
0. 0 0 
;:,... 
0.0 L~-L-.l..~_~--L.JJ2:::3~LJ 
0,625 1,25 2.5 5,0 10,0 20,0 40.0 80.0 160.0 0,625 1.25 2.5 5,0 10.0 20.0 40.0 80.0 160.0 
Reciprocal of antivenam dilution x 10
Reciprocal of antivE'nom dilution x 10
Figure 3.3 (A and B). Indirect Antibody ELISA showing the reactivity of non-absorbed rabbit 
monovalent antivenom with homologous and heterologous venoms. The IgG concentration for all 
antivenoms was 7.0 mg/ml. Antivenoms: A: anti-B. moojeni; B: anti-B. neuwiedi. Venoms as 
listed in plate A. 
In Fig. 3.4 (A-F), the linear regressions for the dilution CUlVes above show parallel, near 
parallel, and even superimposing CUlVes, indicating high degrees of cross-reaction between 
venoms. Table 3.1 shows the slope values for each individual antivenom linear regression 
for the above titration CUlVes. Identical slopes are found for some antivenoms when reacted 
against homologous and heterologous venoms. These results indicate the existence of 
crossreacting epitopes on all venoms studied. 
Table 3.1. Slopes of linear regression from antivenom titration reactivity curves. 
Antivenoms Venoms 
B. 'araraca B. alternatus B. atrox B. cotiara B. moo 'eni B. neuwiedi B. 'araracussu 
anti-B. jararaca 0.22 0.20 0.22 0.28 0.27 0.26 0.15 
anti-B. alternatus 0.22 0.22 0.21 0.22 0.15 0.16 0.15 
anti-B. atrox 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.26 0.22 0.23 0.20 
anti-B. moojeni 0.18 0.18 0.17 0.21 0.24 0.24 0.19 
anti-B. neuwiedi 0.22 0.17 0.17 0.22 0.24 0.25 0.20 
anti-B. 'araracussu 0.14 0.11 0.12 0.12 0.21 0.24 0.15 
The point of intersection of two lines drawn from the (vertical) venom species and (horizontal) monovalent 
antivenoms indicate the slope value for that particular venom/antivenom reaction. Venoms and antivenoms 
are grouped together according to similar slope values. Results are the mean of two experiments. 
O"l ... 
'"' '" ... 
?: ." c 
'" ... 
2.5 r-----~'-------~ 
o B. jaTaTaca 
2.0 6,  B. jararacussu 
II~L. \7 B. allernalus 
"'.~ T B. alTo" 
1.5 _ ~~~ 0 B. mooj.nl 
".~  B. neuwiedi 
'-.:lWl ~i /::;. B. coliaTa 
1.0 ." ~t 
.".,,~~~ 
0.5 - ".".~~. 
0.0 - ~.'a 
- 0.5 '---'---1...J1_.l..-.I..J.t_L--I~ l...Jt_l-.J.t---1 
0,6 1,25 2.5 5,0 iO 20 40 80 160 
Reciprocal of antivenom dilution )( 10
2.0 r--------='-------~ 
- O. 5 ~~-L_.l..-. '-L-_L--I~---L-.l..---L---1 
0,6 1,25 2.5 5,0 10 20 40 80 160 
Reciprocal of antivenom dilution x 10
2.0 ,---____ ---=E"--____ ----., 
0,6 1.25 2.~ 5,0 10 20 40 80 160 
Reciprocal of anUvenom dilution x 10
B 2.0 ,-----~ _____ __, 
E 1.5 
'" ... 
"'0 1.0 
'" 'v; 
~ 0.5 
o 0.0 
'"' '" ... 
0> ... 
0,6 1.25 2.5 5,0 10 20 "0 80 160 
Reciprocal of anUvenom dilution )( 10] 
D 2.' r-------'~-------, 
0,6 1.25 2,5 5,0 10 20 "0 80 160 
R@ciprocol of antiv .. nom dilutiol'l  10 
2.0 ,------=-------__, 
-0. 5 ~.l.-1-,1_l...-1...J..1--,1_l..--'--...J1,___L-.J I 
0,6 1.25 2.5 I.D 10 20 40 60 160 
Reciprocal of ontivenom dilution x 10
Figure 3.4 (A-F) Shows the linear regressIons calculated for all the antivenom cmves m the 
antibody-capture assay. Antivenoms: A: anti-B. jararaca; B: anti-B. jararacussu; C, anti-B. 
alternatus; D, anti-B. atrox; E, anti-B. neuwiedi; F, anti-B. moojeni. Venoms are as listed in plate 
A. All values represent the mean of duplicate experiments. The symbols in the linear regression 
CUlVes are used for the identification of each venom 
3.1 .4. Inhibition ELISA 
These experiments were performed to obtain additional information on the cross-reactivities 
shown in the antibody ELISA. This was done by analysing the degree of inhibition of the 
homologous reaction between a venom and its specific antivenom achieved by the 
heterologous venoms. The results in Fig 3.5 (A-D) and Fig. 3.6 (A, B), show the linear 
regression cmves of the inhibition assays. It can be observed that all antivenoms were 
inhibited to some degree by the heterologous venoms. There are no superimposed curves 
and most individual inhibition cmves are non-parallel. 
100 r--------_____ -------, 80r-------______ -, 
80 I- ~_ _ 
~'" 0" -~:::~ __ _ 
60 I- ~'\7" D_~/\ _ 
T'~ 0 D_~D 
T, ~ 0_ 
~ 0 D 
40 I- _-. ~~ _ 
-'-'-e~ 
20~ ~. 
o I ~ I I I I I J~Y 
40 7: 
1500 600 240 96 38 15 6 2 
1500 600 240 96 38 15 6 2 
Inhlblto~ (~9) 
100 100 
'\7"" 80 
.~ 80 
I-  ---T ___ ... ___ 
~\7"" '" "'---... c 
c \7-V 0", ---"'---,.. 
""~ 0 60 ~ ~ -V---v -~ D 
~~ ~-V-V :.: ~ .E .-...-...~ : 40 40 
I- II~. 4 '" -V -lilt lilt 
D-D-D-D~~ .-'==I~~ 0", D-D-D 
20 -. . . .~ 20 r- -
"" ~"''::;6 
I I I I I I I I I 0 0 
1500 600 240 96 38 15 6 2 
Inhibito~ (~9) Inhibito~ (~9) 
Figure 3.5 (A-D). Linear regression curves showing inhibition ELISA results. Non-absorbed 
monovalent antivenoms were inhibited by the homologous and heterologous venoms. Plates were 
coated with Iflg of a single specific venom as: A: B. jararaca~ B: B. jarara~ussu~ C: B. altematus~ D: 
B. atroX' Antivenoms: A: Anti-B. jararaca~ B: anti-B. jararacussu; C: antl-B. altematus~ D: antJ-B. 
atrox. Iriliibiting venoms are as listed in the key of 3.5 B. Concentration of IgG for all antlvenoms 
was equal to 7.0 mg/ml. 
100 100 
80 - .~O~ - 80 
c 60 I- ~---D ~.~ c 60 0  ---D--.0.~.~ - .2 ... ... 
.D V~~ d~~~~ D .- .-&. 
~ , ~O" 
40 I-
v~ '0, - 40 ~ 
V~~ "'0 
20 I- ~.~ - 20 
0 I I I I I I I I I 0 
1500 600 240 96 38 15 6 2 1500 600 240 96 38 15 6 
Inhibitor (~g) Inhibitor (~9) 
Figure 3.6 (A and B). Linear regression curves showing inhibition ELISA results. Non-
absorbed monovalent antivenoms were inhibited by the homologous and heterologous 
venoms. Plates were coated with a single specific venom, 1 Jlg/ml, 100 Jll/well. Venoms: A; 
B. moojeni, B; B. neuwiedi. Antivenoms: A; anti-B. moojeni, B; anti-B. neuwiedi. Venoms 
are symbols as in key of Figure 3.5 (B). Concentration ofantivenom IgG as in Figure 3.5. 
This can be more clearly observed in Table 3.2 where the slopes for each individual 
inhibition curve are shown. Note the non-concordance of slope values for antivenoms with 
the homologous and heterologous venoms. 
Table 3.2. Slopes of linear regression from antibody inhibition curves 
Antivenoms Venoms 
B B BIB .jararaca . jararacussu . a ternatus . atrox B .. B 'd' B . moo/em . neuwle 1 . cotiara 
anti-B. jararaca I 11.1 2.2 8.0 6.1 4.3 1.6 3.5 
anti-B. jararacussu 8.13 10.3 6.6 8.27 6.95 8.1 3.7 
anti-B. alternatus 11.2 0.6 12.3 7.9 0.8 4.5 7.8 
anti-B. atrox 10.5 2.8 3.8 3.1 4.5 2.7 0.45 
anti-B. moojeni 5.9 4.6 4.7 6.3 7.8 4.6 2.2 
anti-B. neuwiedi 7.7 8.4 5.0 6.0 8.7 10.8 I 5.3 
The point of intersection of two lines drawn from the (vertical) venom specIes and (honzontal) monovalent 
antivenoms indicate the slope value for that particular venom/antivenom reaction. The bordered cells show the 
slope for the homologous venom/antivenom reaction. The results are the mean of two experiments. 
The results confirm the existence of cross-reacting epitopes m the Bothropic venoms 
studied. They also show that there are differences in these cross-reactivities as some venoms 
show higher degree of inhibition of some antivenoms than others. These differences could 
be indicating the presence of different concentrations of similar epitopes in the venoms (and 
possibly similar venom components) or the presence of cross-reacting epitopes with varied 
degrees of reactivity towards the heterologous antibodies, or both. The unique slope values 
observed for the homologous reaction could be indicative of species-specific venom 
epitope( s) or components. 
The inhibition analysis allowed for a venom reactivity index to be calculated. For this the 
total amount of venom needed to inhibit by 50% the homologous reaction of an antivenom 
was used as a measure. Table 3.3 shows the amount of each venom needed to cause a 50% 
inhibition. Values greater than 1500 flg were used as 1500 flg and smaller than 1.0 flg as 
1.0 flg. In Table 3.4 the venoms are classified according to their reactivity index. 
Table 3.3 Amount of venom producing 50% inhibition of heterologous and homologous antivenoms 
Venoms (f.lg) 
Ant" B . B . Bitt B tr B B 'ed' B cotiara Ivenom . Lararaca lararacussu . a erna us . a ox . moolem . neUWl 1 
anti-B. jar I 59.6 >,1500 198.0 215.0 1.5 <1.0 <1.0 
anti-B.jsu 171.0 312.0 >1,500 242.0 280.0 97.0 >1,500 
anti-B. alt 280.0 >1500 110.0 372.0 >1,500 >1,500 193.0 
anti-B. atr 55.0 >1500 31.0 <1.0 >1,500 >1,500 525.0 
anti-B. moj 171.0 508.0 1100 171.0 13.0 2.4 2.4 
anti-B. neu 304.0 605.0 >1,500 508.0 149.0 82.0 I >1500 
The intercepting lines drawn from the (vertical) venoms columns and (honzontal) anttvenom columns 
indicate the value in f.lg of venom needed to inhibit by 50% the respective antivenom. Bordered cells show 
values for a 50% inhibition in the homologous venom/antivenom system. 
Table 3.4 Classification of immunoreactivity of venoms according to their antivenom inhibition activity 
Reactivity grading Venom Amount of venom (f.lg) 
1st B. atrox 1509 
2nd B. j araraca 2040 
3rd B. neuwiedi 3182 
4th B. moojeni 3560 
5th B. cotiara 3721 
6th B. alternatus 4439 
7th B. jararacussu 6750 
Venoms were graded according to their immunoreactivity based on the total amount needed for each 
one to inhibit the specific reaction of all anti venoms tested by 50%. 
The results of Table 3.4 indicate that the venom from B. atrox is the most reactive, as a 
smaller amount of the venom is needed to obtain a 50% inhibition of the antivenoms. 
3.1.5.lmmunoelectrophoresis of Venoms 
The ELISA results showed the existence of cross-reactivity between the Bothropic venoms 
studied. However no information is given as to whether the crossreacting antigenic 
determinants are present in only one venom component or more. In order to visualise the 
crossreacting component( s) or any possible species-specific component, 
immunoelectrophoresis tests were performed and the monovalent antivenoms were reacted 
with the electrophoresed homologous and heterologous venoms. In Fig. 3.7 (A-D) and Fig. 
3.8 (A, B) it can be observed that there is an extensive cross-reaction between the 
monovalent antivenoms and the heterologous venoms. 
a-B. jar 
a-B. j80 
a-B. alt 
... .J ... \' 
a-B. atr a-B. atr 1.--..,,.---------.-==<',,,,...---
a-B.moj 
a-B. neo ~;:;::::~:~=====::J I a-B. neu~====::~::::=:::=:~ 
a-B. atr 
a-B. alt 
a-B. jar 
a-B. jar 
a-B. j80 
a-B. jsu 
a-B. alt 
a-B. atr 
a-B. moj 
a-B. moJ 
a-B. neu ~ ~~~ .. __ e :::.-
a-B. neo 
Figure 3.7 (A-D). Immunoelectrophoresis of Bothropic venoms against homologous and 
heterologous rabbit monovalent antivenom showing extensive cross-reactivity. Each plate contains 
5.0 ~g of a single specific venom applied to the wells in a volume of 1 ~l. Homologous and 
heterologous antivenoms were added to the troughs as indicated in volumes of 70 ~l containing 
740 ~g of IgG. Venoms: A: B. jararaca; B: B. jararacussu; C: B. alternatus; D: B. atrox; 
Antivenoms: anti-B. jararaca (a-B. jar); anti-B. jararacussu (a-B. jsu); anti-B. alternatus (a-B. alt); 
anti-B. atrox (a-B. atr); anti-B. moojeni (a-B. moj); anti-B. neuwiedl (a-B. neu). 
a-B. moj ~ __ ""~~ __ ~,,,,-~, 
a-B. jar 
a-B. jsu 
a-B. atr 
a-B. neu 
. ~ \ , . 
a-B. nen 
a-B. jar 
a-B.jsu 
a-B. alt 
a-B. atr 
Figure 3.8 (A and B). Immunoelectrophoresis ofBothropic venoms reacted with homologous and 
heterologous rabbit monovalent antivenom showing extensive cross-reactivity. Each plate 
contains 5.0 flg of a single specific venom applied to the wells in a volume of 1 fll. Homologous 
and heterologous antivenins were added to the troughs as indicated in volumes of 70 fll 
containing 740 flg of IgG. Venoms: A: B. moojeni; B: B. neuwiedi. Antivenoms: anti-B. 
'araraca, (a-B. jar); anti-B. jararacussu, (a-B. jsu); anti-B. alternatus, (a-B. alt); anti-B. atrox, 
(a-B. atr); anti-B. moojeni, (a-B. moj); anti-B. neuwiedi, (a-B. neu). 
Some anti venoms react to more venom components in an heterologous venom than the 
heterologous venom's own homologous antivenom This is observed with the anti-B. 
neuwiedi antivenom against the venoms of B. jararaca, B. jararacussu and B. atrox, 
Fig. 3.7 (A, B, and D) respectively, and with the anti-B. alternatus and anti-B. moojeni 
against the venom of B. neuwiedi, Fig. 3.8 (B). The results show clearly that more than one 
venom component is responsible for the crossreactivities observed in all cases shown. No 
precipitin line specific for any of the venom species studied could be observed. 
3.1.6. 2-Dimensional gel immunoelectrophoresis of venoms 
The better resolution power of this technique was used in order to show the existence or 
not of species-specific venom components in the Bothropic venoms used in this study. For 
this the variation of the technique which places an intermediate gel between the first and 
second dimension gels was used. The intermediate gel containing a mixture of heterologous 
antivenoms IgG. This was devised to precipitate the crossreacting components of the 
electrophoresed venom, allowing a visualisation of any specific component( s) for that 
venom that would precipitate in the second dimension gel (reference gel) containing the 
homologous antivenom 
3.1.7. 2-Dimensional gel immunoelectrophoresis with 
monovalent rabbit antivenom in the reference gel. 
Before setting up the experiment with the intermediate gel the technique was standardised 
without any intermediate gel. The patterns shown in Fig. 3.9 (A-D) and Fig. 3.10 (A, B) 
were obtained with rabbit monovalent antivenom IgG in the reference gel. 
Drawing showing how the 2D-IEP is performed. The samples migrate from the negative side to 
the positive side. If an intermediate gel is used it is placed between the First dimension gel and 
the reference gel. 2D-IEP Figures in the Results section are representative of the second 
dimension electrophoresis run. 
0 (+) 
Reference gel 
First dimension gel Intermediate gel 
0 o First dimension gel (-) 
( -) Fi~t dimens~n (+) 
Figure 3.9 (A-D). 2-Dimensional immunoelectrophoresis of Bothropic venoms. Venom 
components were separated in the first dimension and then reacted with their specific non-absorbed 
monovalent antivenom by electrophoresis in the second dimension in agarose gel. Venoms were 
5.0 Jlg in aU cases in 5.0 Jll. Monovalent specific antivenom IgG was applied at 2.5 mg/ml in 2.0 ml 
for alJ cases studied. A: B. jararaca venomlantivenom system, B: B. jararacussu venomlantivenom 
system, C : B. allernatus system, : B. atrox system. Visible peaks for each system are numbered. 
First dimension electrophoresis, 10 V/cm, 1 hr, 30 min. Second dimension 2.5 V/cm for 16 hr. 
Figure 3.10 (A, B) 2-Dimensional immunoelectrophoresis of Botillopic venoms. Venom 
components were separated in the first dimension and then reacted with their specific non-absorbed 
monovalent antivenom by electrophoresis in the second dimension in agarose ge1. Venoms were 
5.0 Ilg in all cases in 5.0 Ill. Monovalent specific aJltivenom IgG was applied at 2.5 mg/mt in 2.0 m1 
for all cases studied in the reference gel of second dimension . Experimental conditions as in Figure 
3.9. Venomlantivenom system, A: B. moojeni, B: B. neuwiedi 
These results were obtained with an IgG/venom ratio of 500: I . Multiple precipitin arcs are 
observed for all the venoms studied and the most clearly identified were numbered. Again 
there is evidence of the muJticomponent nature of Bothropic snake venoms. The precipitin 
patterns are different for each venom species used. The results shown here are the results of 
great efforts to ensure that the technique was standardised. 
3.1.8. 2-Dimensional gel immunoelectrophoresis of venoms with 
intermediate gel. 
In these experiments the IgG/venom ratio was maintained at 500: 1 and the same batches of 
antivenom IgG as in the previous 2D-IEP experiments were used. The intermediate gel 
contained equal amounts of the heterologous antivellom IgGs in final concentrations higher 
than that used for the homologous IgG in the reference gel. TIlis was done in order to tty to 
ensure that all, or most, crossreacting components wouJd be precipitated in the intermediate 
gel. Fig. 3.11 shows the results for the B. moojeni venom. In plates (B) and (C) it is evident 
that a precipitin arc shows reactivity ouly in the reference gel. 
Figure 3.11 2-Dimensional immunoelectrophoresis of B. moojeni venom with intermediate gel 
containing a mixture of heterologous antivenom TgO's. Experimental conditions as in Figure 3.9. 
A: Control with saline in the intermediate gel, B: Intermediate gel containing 3 times 
concentration of IgG as in reference gel. C: Intermediate gel containing 5 times the concentration 
of IgG. Antivenoms IgG in intermediate gel: anti- B. jararaca, anti-B. jararacussu, anti- B. 
a/ternatus, anti-B. atrox and anti-B. neuwiedi added in equal amounts. Arrow in reference gel 
indicates a peak with species specificity. 
In Fig. 3. 12 (A, B) the re ults for the B. atrox venom i hown. In plate B, a precipitin arc i 
observed showing no reaction with the intennediate gel. 
Figure 3.12 2- Dimensional imrnWlOelectrophoresis of B. atrox venom. Conditions as in igure 
3.9. A- Control gel with saline in intennediate gel. B. Intennediate gel containing mixture of 
heterologous antivenoms IgGs as: anti-B. jararaca, anti-B. jararacussu, anti-B. aiternatus, anti-B. 
moojeni and anti-B. neuwiedi in equal amounts 5 times more concentrated than IgG in reference 
gel. Arrow in reference gel indicates a peak with species specificity. 
The result for the B. a/lematus venom is shown in Fig. 3.12 (A-C). In plate C two 
precipitin arcs can be observed in the reference gel. Both show also reactivity with the 
intermediate denoted by the extension of their 'feet' into this gel. One of them indicated by 
the an-ow shows a sharper precipitin line in the reference gel. 
Figure 3.13 2-Dimensional immunoelectrophoresis of B. allernalus venom. Conditions as in 
Figure 3.9. A- Control gel with saline in mtennediate gel. B. Intennediate gel containing mixture 
of heterologous antivenoms IgGs as: anti-B. jararaca, anti-B. jararacussu, anti-B. atrox, anti-B. 
moojeni and anti-B. neuwiedi in equal amowlts 5 times more concentrated than IgG in the 
reference gel. Arrow in reference gel indicates a peak with species specificity. 
In Fig. 3.14 (A-C) are shown the result for the B. jararacussu venom 
.. . : 
 \ I 
Figure 3.14 2-Dimensional immwlOelectrophoresis of B. jararacussu venom. Conditions as in 
Figure 3.9. A: Control gel with saline in intermediate ge1. B: Gel with intermediate geJ containing 
mixture of heterologous antivenoms IgGs: auti-B. jararaca, anti-B. alternatus, auti-B. atrox, 
anti-B. moojeni and anti-B. neuwiedi in equal amounts, 5 times more concentrated than IgG in 
the reference gel. Arrow in reference gel indicates a peak with species-specmcity. 
It can be observed in plates (B) and (C), of Figure 3.14 that only one precipitin arc showing 
reactivity in the reference and intermediate gel, and none show reactivity only in the 
reference gel. In plate C, where the concentration of the IgG in the intermediate gel is lOX 
that of the reference ge~ only the upper part of the peak reacts with the reference gel. 
The B. moojeni result, (Fig. 3.11), seems to indicate the existence of a species-specific 
component in that venom This is probably also true for the venom of B. atrox (Fig. 3.12). 
However the results for the venoms of B. alternatus and B. jararacussu failed to show any 
clear indication of such specific venom components. For the B. alternatus venom (Fig. 3. 
13) in plate C, the sharper precipitin line of the peak identified (arrow) in the reference gel is 
indicative of higher reactivity with the homologous antivenom IgG. It is possible that using 
higher concentrations of IgG in the intermediate gel could have resolved the two peaks and 
a clearer result could be obtained. The failure to observe any precipitin arcs in the reference 
gel in some of these results does not confirm the absence of species-specific components. 
Nor does it indicate where such arcs are observed, that they represent the only species-
specific antigens. The results do however, show that the precipitin peaks obtained with the 
venom components of B. moojeni and B. atrox with species-specific characteristics could be 
used for animal immunisation to try to generate species-specific antivenom reagents. 
3.1.9. Production of species-specific antivenoms 
The results obtained in the 2D-IEP with an intermediate gel (Section 3.1.8) indicated the 
existence of species-specific venom components for some of the studied venoms. As 
pointed out before it would be worthwhile to inject such components into animals for the 
production of species-specific antivenoms. It was decided then to repeat the 2D-IEP 
experiments on larger gel plates, cut out from the agarose gel the precipitin peaks showing 
species-specificity and use them for the immunisation of rabbits. 
3.1.9.1.2D-IEP with polyvalent antivenom in the reference gel 
The purpose of this experiment was to standardise the technique, before setting up the 
experiment with the intermediate gel. The glass plates used were 8 X 8 cm The antivenom 
used in the reference gel was a commercial preparation of a polyvalent antibothropic horse 
antivenom F(ab')2' They were in large supply, contrary to the short supplies of monovalent 
antivenom As the commercial antivenoms are obtained mostly from long term immunised 
horses they should contain antivenom antibodies with higher affinity yielding better resolved 
precipitin patterns. Fig. 3.15 (A-H) shows the precipitin patterns obtained with 0.5 m1 of the 
polyvalent antibothropic anti venom in the reference gel and 300 ~g of venom separated in 
the first dimension electrophoresis. 
C 2, A B 
3. ,2 
l- i t  i: 
~ .1 2 , 
E F 2, G H 
r' ,3 
2 , 2. 
f, ~.,., .. -. 
Figure 3.15 2-Dimensional immunoelectrophoresis of venoms using polyvalent antibothropic horse 
F(ab')2 in the reference gel. 300 flg of each venom was applied separately in each plate in 6 fll. 
Reference gels contains 0.5 m1 ofpolyvalent antivenom in all cases. Electrophoresis conditions as in 
Figure 3.9. First dimension run for 3.0 hr and second for 16 hr. Visible peaks are numbered. 
Venoms: A: B. jararaca, B: B. jararacussu, C: B. a/ternatus, D: B. atrox, E: B. moojeni, F: B. 
neuwiedi, G: B. co tiara, H: L. muta. 
In all cases there is a good resolution of the precipitin peaks and the precipitin patterns are 
different for each of the species of venom used. When compared to the similar experiment 
in Section 3.l. 7, performed with the monovalent antivenom in the reference gel, the 
precipitin peaks obtained here with the polyvalent antivenom are better resolved. The 
precipitin patterns are different for each venom species. The results were considered 
satisfactory and the conditions as standardised. 
3.1.9.2. 2D-IEP with intermediate gel and polyvalent antivenom in 
the reference gel. 
The objective of this experiment was to produce specific single antigens to be used in 
immunisation schemes to generate species-specific antivenoms. The use of an intermediate 
gel containing a mixture of monovalent antivenom IgGs, heterologous to the venom 
separated in the first dimension, had the same purpose stated in Section 3.l.8; that is, 
absorb the crossreacting venom components allowing the visualisation of species-specific 
component( s) as precipitin peaks in the reference gel. The precipitin peaks with the species-
specific characteristics would be excised from the agarose gel and after a washing procedure 
immunised into rabbits. The intermediate gel antivenom mixture contained equal amounts of 
each heterologous IgG making a total of20 mg. In Fig. 3.16 (A) is the pattern observed for 
the B. moojeni venom There are five peaks showing species-specificity. Peak no.5 is not 
clearly visible in the picture. In plate (B) is a similar B. moojeni experiment stained with 
Coomassie Blue, after the excision of the specific peaks. In Fig. 3.17 (A, B) is the result for 
the B. atrox venom Four peaks are observed with species-specific characteristics. Peak 
no.4 is not clearly visible in the picture. Peaks 2 and 3 seem to be composed of more then 
one component as their forward feet show lines reacting with the intermediate gel and lines 
not reacting. For this reason they were also excised. In (B) another B. atrox plate shows the 
excised peaks and is stained as in Fig. 3. 17(B). Fig. 3.18 (A, B) shows the B. neuwiedi 
results. Only two peaks (not clearly visible in the plate (A were observed with species-
specific characteristics. In plate (B) the excised peaks are shown after protein staining, as in 
(Fig. 3.17 (B. In all cases the results in plates (A) were analysed with the aid of an 
illuminating box and a magnifying glass in a dark room for better accuracy in detennining 
the specific peaks and excision of these. Not all crossreacting components were precipitated 
in the intermediate gel, this is particularly true for the B. neuwiedi venom Fig. 3.18(A, B). 
However it was possible to excise peaks with the desired specificity. 
Figure 3.16 (A and B) 2-Dimensional immunoelectrophoresis of Bothrops moojeni with 
intermediate gel, using polyvalent antibothropic horse F(ab')2 in the reference gel. Intermediate 
gel contains a mixture of anti-B. jararaca, anti-B. a/ternatus, anti-B. atrox, anti-B. moojeni and 
anti-B. neuwiedi IgG added in equal amounts in a total concentration of 20 mg/mI. 
Electrophoresis conditions as in Figure 3.9. First dimension run for 3 hours and second 
dimension run for 16 hours. Peaks showing species-specificity are numbered. Plate B shows the 
peaks excised from agarose gel for rabbit immunisation. 
Figure 3.17 (A and B) 2-Dimensional immunoelectrophoresis of Bolhrops atrox with intermediate 
ge~ using polyvalent antibothropic horse F(ab')2 in the reference gel. Intermediate gel contains a 
mixture of anti-B. jararaca, anti-B. jararacussu, anti-B. a/lernalus, anti-B. moojeni and anti-B. 
neUWiedi IgG added in equal amounts in a total concentration of 20 mglml. Electrophoresis 
conditions as in Figure 3.9. First dimension run for 3 hours and second dimension run for 16 hours. 
Peaks showing species-specificity are numbered. Plate B shows the peaks excised from agarose gel 
for rabbit immunisation. 
Figure 3.18 (A and B) 2-Dimensional immunoelectrophoresis of Bothrops neuwiedi with 
intermediate gel, using polyvalent antibothropic horse Fab2 in the reference gel. Intermediate 
gel contains a mixture of anti-B. jararaca, anti-B. jararacussu, anti-B. a/ternatus, anti-B. 
atrox and anti-B. moojeni IgG added in equal amounts in a total concentration of20 mg/mI. 
Electrophoresis conditions as in Figure 3.9. First dimension run for 3 hours and second 
dimension run for 16 hours. Peaks showing species-specificity are numbered. Plate B shows 
the peaks excised from agarose gel for rabbit immunisation 
3.1.9.3.lmmunisation of rabbits with venom immune complexes in 
agarose gels. 
In order to raise species-specific antivenoms against some of the Bothropic venoms studied, 
the precipitin peaks excised from the agarose gels in the experiments of Section 3.1.9.2, 
were washed with several changes of 0.1 M PBS, pH 7.4, to remove any non-precipitated 
material and emulsified with FCA for the first dose and FIA for the subsequent doses. Each 
dose consisted of the material from two identical precipitin peaks for each venom, excised 
from different experiments. The immunisations were carried out at the Venom Unit at the 
Livetpool School of Tropical Medicine by Dr. G.D.R. Laing. After the 16 week 
immunisation scheme there was no detectable antivenom activity in any of the immunised 
rabbits sera. This procedure for production of specific antivenom was discontinued. It 
demanded large amounts of monovalent antivenom which were not available. 
3. 1.9.4. Venom affinity adsorption of monovalent antivenom. 
Based on the previous results in which the 2D-IEP assays had strongly indicated the 
presence of species-specific venom components, a second approach was used to generate 
species-specific antivenoms. It consisted in the absotption out of the cross-reacting 
antibodies in the antivenoms by affinity adsotption onto venom adsorbents. 
3.1.9.4.1.Adsorption on venom adsorbents containing a mixture of 
heterologous venoms in equal amounts 
The antivenoms were added to the adsorbents containing the heterologous venoms and 
mixed for a period of time. After the adsotption step ( s) it was expected that the cross-
reacting antivenom antibodies would have bound to the venom adsorbent leaving the 
specific antibodies in the supernatant. Prior to testing the absorbed antivenoms for loss of 
cross-reactivity they were tested first for the maintenance of the specific reactivity. In 
Fig. 3.19 (A-D) it can be observed that the absorbed antivenoms display a decrease in the 
intensity of the homologous reaction when compared to the unabsorbed antivenom but 
maintain the specific reactivity, in this case, after two adsotption steps. It can also be 
observed that some antivenoms show a shatper decrease in the specific reactivity than 
others, (Fig. 3 .19 (D. The decrease in the specific reactivity was shown later to be 
followed by a decrease in the IgG content of the absorbed antivenoms after the adsorption 
steps (see Appendix IV). The absorbed antivenoms were then tested for cross-reactivity 
with the heterologous Bothropic venoms. 
A - Non-Absorbed 
-Absorbed 
'" 1.5 o~ 0> 
" 1.0 O~ 0 q 
0.5 \ 
. -<i)- -'" 
5 10 20 
Recipr-ocol of ontivenom dirution x 10 
_ Non-Ab90rb~d 
_Absorbed 
Y, ~ c 1.5 CO< 0> .., \ 
1.0 \ 
0 \ 0 , 
5 10 20 
Reciprocoi of antivenom dilution x 10' 
'" ... 
" 0 0 
" 0 0 
- Non-Absorbed 
B - Absorbed 
2.0 e----. 
0.5 "-
"-e __ 
0.0 ----'" 
5 10 20 
Reciprocal of ontivenom dilution x 
_ Non-Ab90rb~d 
-Ab~orbed 
5 10 20 
Reciprocal of antivenom dilution )( 10 
Figure 3.19 ELISA results comparing the specific reaction of unabsorbed and absorbed antivenoms 
with their homologous venom. Plates coated with a single venom at lllg/~ 1 00 Ill/well. Absorbed 
and unabsorbed antivenoms were reacted separately with their homologous venoms at the same 
dilutions. A: B. jararaca venom and homologous antivenoms; B: B. jararacussu venom and 
homologous antivenom; C: B. alternatus venom and homologous antivenom; D: B. moojeni venom 
and homologous antivenom 
 o B. jararaca 
 B. jararacuss 
0.3 0.8 '- -
'V B. alternatu 9\ E ..,. B. atrox E c: 
0 B. moojeni 
c: 0.6 -
CD N -
'V~ c 
\" B. eoti". 
Cl 0.4 C-
O Cl -
'V~ 0.1 
.~ 0.2 - -
 ~6.~6.~~6. 
0.0 .J. ... .J. ... 0.0 
1 :250 1:500 1 :1000 1:2"000 
Antivenom dilution 
Antivenom IgG dilution 
1.0 0.5 
0.4  
\ E c: 0.3 N 
-----------. 
0.8 .-. 
c: 0.6 
0.2 0.1 ~ 
0.0 0.0 
1:250 1:500 1:1000 1:2000 1 :250 1 :500 1:1000 1 :2000 
Antivenom IgG dilution Antivenom IgG dilution 
Figure 3.20 (A-D) ELISA showing species-specificity of absorbed antivenoms. Different 
dilutions of absorbed monovalent antivenoms were reacted with their homologous and 
heterologous venoms. A: anti-B. jararacussu, B: anti-B. neuwiedi, C: anti-B. neuwiedi, 
D: anti-B. moojeni. Venoms are as listed in A and were coated onto the plate at 1 flg/ml, 
100 fll/well. 
In Fig. 3.20 (A-D) the same batch of absorbed antivenoms used for the results in Fig. 3.19 
were used, except for the anti-B. jararacussu. Note the increased species-specificity of all 
absorbed antivenoms. Anti-B. jararacussu in Fig. 3.20 (A) was used at higher dilution and 
shows no cross-reactivity at all. The other antivenoms were used at lower dilution. 
Anti-B. a/ternatus, Fig. 3.20 (B), anti-B. neuwiedi, Fig. 3.20 (C), and anti-B. moojeni, Fig. 
3.20 (D), show some residual cross-reactivity. 
Fig. 3.21 shows a picture of an ELISA plate of a similar experiment using the same batch of 
absorbed antivenoms as in Fig. 3.20 (A-D). Observe the increased species-specificity for the 
absorbed antivenoms. Again the absorbed anti-B. neuwiedi displays higher cross-reactivity. 
Note that the absorbed anti-B. jararacussu, Fig. 3.21 (A), maintains its increased species-
specificity even when used at the lower dilution of 1:250. Another example of the increased 
on ... .. 
on .. 
o .. .. 
o ... 
on ... .. 
on .. 
Figure 3.21 (A-D) ELISA plates showing the reaction of 10 venoms against the absorbed 
antivenoms. A: anti-B. jararacussu, B: anti-B. a/ternatus, C: anti-B. moojeni, D: anti-B. neuwiedi. 
Venoms coated at l.0 flg/ml, 100 fll/well and labelled as: 1: B. jararaca, 2: B. jararacussu, 3: B. 
atrox, 4: B. a/ternatus, 5: B. moojeni, 6: B. neuwiedi, 7: B. cotiara, 8: L. muta, 9: Crotalus d. 
collineatus, 10: Crotalus d terrificus. Antivenoms dilution's as shown on the left of each plate. 
1+3 = Venom + conjugate; l' Conjugate alone. Conjugate, Sheep anti-rabbit IgG-HRP, used at 
1:20,000 dilution. 
species-specificity after absorption steps are shown in Fig. 3.22(A-D), where a new batch of 
absorbed antivenoms was used. Fig. 3.22(A) shows the 3X absorbed anti-B. jararaca, used 
at 1: 100 dil .. Note the remaining minor cross-reactivity against some heterologous venoms. 
In (B) the 2 X anti-B. jararacussu at 1: 100 dil. also displays some cross-reactivity, more 
accentuated against the venoms of B. moojeni and B. neuwiedi. In (C) the 3X absorbed 
anti-B. moojeni (1:200 dil.) showing a more significant cross-reactivity against the venom of 
B. neuwiedi. In (D) the quasi complete species-specificity of the 3X absorbed anti-B. 
neuwiedi used at 1 :200 dil. and in (E) the species-specific reaction of 3X absorbed anti-L . 
muta (1:200 dil.). These experiments show that the absorption of antivenoms on venom 
affinity adsorbents yielded reagents with increased species-specificity as tested by ELISA. 
2 345 
\ , I I  I I 
Figure 3.22 (A-D) ELISA plates showing the reaction of ten venoms against the absorbed 
antiv.enoms. A: an~i-B. jara:aca, I: 10? ~ution (dil); B: anti-~. jararacussu, 1: 100. dil.; C.: ~ \Jer,~~S 
moojeni, 1:200 dil.;D: anti-B. neuwledl, 1:200 dil. ; E: antI L. muta venoms, l.200 dil .. 2. B. 
'araraca, 3: B. jararacussu, 4: B. alternatus, 5: B. atrox, 6: B. moojeni, 7: B. neuwiedi, 8: B. 
cotiara, 9: L. muta, 10: Crotalus d terrificus, 11: Crotalus d collineatus. Column 1, buffer alone; 
Column 12. venom + conjugate. Conjugate, sheep anti-rabbit IgG-HRP, used at 1:20,000 dilution. 
In order to increase further the species-specificity of the absorbed antivenoms, specifically 
those with some remaining cross-reactivity, venom adsorbents containing a single venom 
were prepared. These single venom adsorbents were used to '':fine tune" the species-
specificity of absorbed antivenoms by specifically absorbing out any remaining cross-
reactivity against a specific venom Fig. 3.23 (A) shows the results of such fine tuning for 
anti-B. jararaca antivenom, and Fig. 3.23 (B) for anti-B. jararacussu antivenom 
~ 1,00 
g O,~ 
E 0,40 
N 0,30 
... 0,20 
Q o 0,10 
E c 0,40 
~ 0,30 
Q 0,20 
o 0,10 
anti-B. jararaca 
B.j;I'" B.jsu B.alt B.atr B. B. B. cot L nU C.d.t C.d.c 
moj neu 
Venorrs 
B.jar B.jsu B.aIt B.atr B. B. B.cot LnU C.d.t C.d.c 
moJ neu 
Venorrs 
B.jar B.jsu B.aIt B.atr B. B. B.cot Lmli C.d.t C.d.C 
moj neu 
Venom 
E 1,00 
c5 0,00 
~ 0,00 
CI 0,40 
a 0,20 
E 0,50 
c5 0,40 
~ 0,30 
CI 0,20 
a 0,10 
E c 0,4 
en 0,3 ... 
CI 0,2 
anti-B. jararacussu B 
B.jIIr B.jsu B. all B. atr B. B. neu B. cot L nU C.d.t C.d.c 
Venom 
B.jar B.jsu B.aII B.atr B. B. B.cot LnU C.d.t C.d.c 
moj neu 
VenOl1B 
B.jar B.jsu B.aII B.atr B.moj B.neu B.cot LnU C.CU C.d.c 
VenOl1B 
Figure 3.23 (A-B) ELISA results showing increase in the species-specificity of monovalent antivenoms after 
absorption in venom adsorbents containing a single venom. 
Plate A. AI: anti-B.jararaca after two absorption in a venom adsorbent prepared with a mixture of venoms 
in equal amounts each. A2: Same antivenom after separate absorption of 30 min in a B. altematus venom 
adsorbent, 20 min in a B. moojeni adsorbent, 20 min in a B. cotiara adsorbent. A3: Same as in A2 but in 
venom adsorbents of B. altematus venom, 20 min, B. cotiara venom 20 min and L. muta 20 min. 
Antivenoms: Al and A2 diluted I: 100, A3 diluted 1:75. Plate B. BI: Same as in Al but in anti-B. 
jararacussu adsorbent. B2: Same as A2 but in B. jararaca adsorbent 20 min, B. neuwiedi, 20 min, B3: 
Same as in B2 but in B. jararaca adsorbent 20 min and B. moojeni 20 min. Antivenoms: B I and B2 diluted 
1:100, B3 diluted 1:75. Venom are labelled as: B. jar = B. jararaca~ B. jsu = B. jararacussu~ B. alt = B. 
altematus~ B. atr = B. atrox~ B. moj = B. moojeni~ B. neu = B. neuwiedi~ B. cot = B. cotiara~ L. mut = L. 
muta~ C.d.c = Crotalus durissus collineatus,' C .(l.-l cd ,'L~ ,ld~~S\l~ t<>.{~ 
There is an increase in the specificity of both antivenoms. Note in Fig. 3.23 (A2) that the 
serial absorption on single venom adsorbents of B. alternatus, B. moojeni and B. cotiara, 
besides decreasing cross-reaction against these venoms also decreased the cross-reaction 
against the venoms of B. atrox and B. neuwiedi, which suggests the existence of common 
cross-reacting components between these venoms. Similar results are shown in Fig. 3.24 
(A) for the anti-B. moojeni. 
anti-B. moj A 1 
OD492nm 1.00 
B.Jar B.jsu B.aft B. air B. B. B. cot L. rn.t C.d.t C.d.c 
mOj neu 
Venoms 
anti-B. moj 
OD492nm 0.40 
B.jar B.jsu B. aft B. air B. B.neu B. cot L.rn.t 
C.dt C.d.c 
Venoms 
Figure 3.24. Plate A: AI: Same as in AI, in Figure 3.23, but absorbed in 
anti-B. moojeni adsorbent. A2 Same as in A2 in Fig. 3.23 but absorbed in 
B. alternatus adsorbent 20 min, B. neuwiedi adsorbent 20 min and B. 
jararacussu. Venoms labelled as in Figure 3.23. 
These results confirm that the absorption of monovalent antivenoms in venom affinity 
adsorbents increases the species-specificity of the antivenoms, and that this increase in 
specificity is accompanied by a decrease in the intensity of the specific reaction observed as 
a drop in the OD values. 
3.1.9.4.2.Absorption of antivenoms in polyacrylamide venom 
adsorbents. 
Although the absorption procedures shown above were efficient in increasing species-
specificity of antivenoms they were time consuming and laborious. Another procedure was 
tried by preparing polyacrylamide venom adsorbents with proportional amounts of the 
crossreacting venoms. Based on cross-reactivity results of the antivenoms absorbed two 
times in the venom adsorbents containing mixtures of equal amounts of venoms, a cross-
reactivity index was calculated (see Appendix IV). This index provided guidance on 
different venom amounts, proportional to their cross-reactivity towards a single antivenom 
The venoms were then insolubilized on the polyacrylamide beads in proportional amounts to 
their reactivity towards the antivenom to be absorbed. The method of protein 
insolubilization using polyacrylamide beads, retains up to 95% of the antigens antigenicity 
contrary to 25% when insolubilized with glutaraldehyde only [Temynck et al., 1976]. 
Therefore they should work better as immunoadsorbents. Venom adsorbents were prepared 
in volumes of 20 ml each. With these adsorbents it was expected that for a given antivenom, 
after a number of absorption steps, the decrease in the cross-reactivity against the 
heterologous venoms present in the adsorbent would be similar for all, that is, the difference 
between the specific and heterologous reactions should be nearly the same for all venoms. 
In Figures 3.25 (A-D) and 3.26 (A, B) the results of the absorbed antivenoms after two 
adsorption steps in the polyacrylamide venom adsorbents are shown. In Fig 3.25 (A-D) it is 
observed that only anti-B. jararacussu (B) and anti-B. alternatus (C) showed any increase 
in specificity against some of the venoms. In (A) and (D) there was a loss of the specific 
reactivity, with the continuance of the cross-reactivity. 
A B anti-B. jar anti-B. jsu 
0,' 0,18 
0,4' 0,111 
e 0,3' e c 0,3 c: 0,12 
N N 0,1 CTl 0,2' CTl 
~ ~ 0,08 0,2 
0 0,1' 0 
0,011 
0,1 0,04 
0,0' 0,02 
0 B. alt B. atr B. moj B. nen B. cot L. mnt C.dc 
Venoms Venoms 
C D anti-B. atrox 
anti-B. alt 0,4 
0,2 E 
e c 0,2' N 
C 0,1' c:n 0,2 N ~ 
~ C O,U 
0,1 0 
0 0,1 
c 0 t 
Venoms Venoms 
Figure 3.25 ELISA (A-D) showing the cross-reactivity of monovalent antivenoms after 2 
absorption steps in a polyacrylamide gel venom adsorbent containing a mixture of heterologous 
venoms in proportional amounts. Antivenoms are as indicated in the charts. Venoms coating plates: 
IJlg/ml, 100flllwell and labelled as in Figure 3.23. 
In Fig. 3.26 (A and B) again there was no marked increase in the species-specificity of any 
of the antivenoms tested a ainst all of the heterolo ous venoms. 
O,le1 
e c: 0,12 
~ 0,1 
o 0,08 
O,Oel 
anti-B. moj 
B. jar B. jsn B. aIt B. atr B. moj B. nen B. cot L. mnt C.dc 
Venoms 
0,011 
0,0' N 
0 0,03 
anti-B. neu 
B. jar B. jsn B. aIt B. atr B. mojB. nen B. cot L.mnt C.dc 
Venoms 
Figure 3.26 (A and B) ELISA showing the cross-reactivity of monovalent antivenoms after 2 
absotption steps in a polyacrylamide gel venom adsorbent containing a mixture of heterologous 
venoms. Antivenoms are as indicated in the charts. Venoms coating plates: Iflg/ml, 100flllwell and 
labelled as in Fig. 3.23. 
The results indicate that the use of polyacrylamide adsorbents did not improve the 
procedure for obtaining species-specific antivenoms. In fact the absorptions resulted in loss 
of the specific reactivity for some antivenoms, Fig. 3.25 (A). 
3.1.9.4.3.Absorption of antivenoms in glutaraldehyde venom 
adsorbents with proportional amounts of venoms. 
As the polyacrylamide venom adsorbents did not shown any improvement on the absorption 
procedure, it was decided to prepare new venom adsorbents with the proportional amounts 
of venoms, but this time using only glutaraldehyde as the insolubilization medium. The same 
cross-reactive index was used for selection of the amounts of venoms and the results are 
shown in Figures 3.27 (A-D) and Fig. 3.28 (A, C). All antivenoms were absorbed four times 
and it can be observed that in all cases there was a clear increase in the species-specificity. 
In all cases shown the specific reaction is at least two times greater than the non-specific 
reaction. The results showed that the absorption of antivenoms in venom adsorbents with 
proportionally-added venoms yielded antivenoms with species-specificity. Also in most 
cases the difference between the remaining cross-reactivities and the specific reaction are 
somewhat constant suggesting that the proportional amounts of venoms added to the 
adsorbents were near optimal. 
E 0,15 
~ 0,10 ... 
o o 0,05 
r:::: 0,4 
IIntl-R'III'III'IICII 
E O,SO 
C 0,25 
B. jar B. jsu B. aM B. atr B. B. B. oot L. C.d. C.d.c 0,00 
moj nou mut 
VenolYll concentration (11J91m) 
antl-B. alternatu8 0 
B.jar B.jsu B.alt B.atr B.moj B.neu B.cot Lmut C.d.t. C.d.c. B.jar 
Venom Concentration (11-19/ml) 
IIntl-R'III'III'IICUIS&U 
B. jBr B. jsu B. at B. atr B. B. B. cd L met C.dt C.de 
mcj neu 
Venomconcenll'lltlon (11J91m) 
antl-B. atrol 
B.jsu B.alt B.atr B.moj B.neu B.cot Lmut C.d.t. C.d.c. 
Venom Concentration (11-19/m1) 
Figure 3.27 (A-D) ELISA showing the cross-reactivity of monovalent antivenoms after 4 
absorptions in glutaraldehyde venom adsorbents containing proportional (optimal) amounts of 
heterologous venoms. A: anti-B. jararaca diluted, 1: 100; B : anti-B. jararacussu diluted 1: 100; C: 
anti-B. alternatus diluted 1: 100; D: anti-B. atrox diluted 1: 100. Venom labelled as in Fig. 3.23. 
IUIJi B. mooJenI B IInti 8. ntIU witHli 
C 0,8 
S'l  
~ 0,4 
Q 0,4 Q 
B. jar" B. jsu B. all: B. au B. moj B. neu B. cct L. rn.t C.d.t. C.d.t. B. jar" B. jsu B. all: B. air B. moj B. neu B. cct L. rn.t C.d.t. C.d.. 
Venom concentration (11J9/rri) Venom concentration (11Jg1m1) 
anti-L. muta 
CJ') 0,80 
0 0,40 
B. Jar B. JSU B. alt B. atr B. B. B. cot L. mut C.d.t C.d.c 
moJ neu 
Venom concentration (1IJglml) 
Figure 3.28 (A-C) ELISA showing the cross-reactivity of monovalent antivenoms after 4 
absorptions in glutaraldehyde venom adsorbents containing proportional (optimal) amounts of 
heterologous venoms. A: anti-B. moojeni diluted 1: 100; B: anti-B. neuwiedi diluted 1: 100; C: anti-
L. mula, diluted 1: 400. 
3.1.10.Efficiency of Antibody [1251] Conjugation 
The efficiency of the labelling was tested by solid-phase radioimmunoassay as described in 
Materials and Methods. Below is a typical result of the labelling procedure. 
Counts per minute 
TCA precipitate 
Supernatant 
Total 
(X) 485,561.6 
(Y) 16,156.6 
501,718.2 
01 .. .c:. . 485561.6 
10 ell1clency == X 100 = 96.7 
501718.2 
-- 97.0% efficiency 
The result show that the labelling was efficient as more than 95% of the radioactive 1251 was 
incorporated onto the antibody molecules in the solution. All radio-labelled conjugates 
prepared had labelling efficiency between 93 % and 99%. 
3.1.11.Production of species-specific monoclonal antibodies 
The species-specific reagents produced by affinity absorption were used to precipitate in the 
homologous venom the component( s) responsible for the specific reactivity. These immune 
complexes (IC) were then used to immunise mice in order to remove their spleen for the 
production of monoclonal antibodies. The absorbed antivenoms used were partly from the 
same batch responsible for the results in Section 3.1.9.4.1 above and also from other 
batches prepared in the same manner; that is, after four absorption steps and showing 
specific reaction at least two times greater than the non-specific reaction. For the 
production of IC the absorbed antivenoms against B. alternatus B atr B " d ,. ox, . mooJem an 
B. neuwiedi were used due to their larger stocks. In Fig. 3.29 it can be obselVed that all 
mice antisera displayed some significant cross-reactivity. The mice immunised with the B. 
atrox venom IC had higher non-specific reactivity than specific reactivity. 
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 
Figure 3.29 ELISA plate showing reactivity of mice serum immunised with species-specific venom 
immune complexes. Plates were coated with different venom solutions at 
1 Jlg/m1, 100 Ill/well. Mice serum at 1: 1,000 dilution was added to wells containing the 
homologous or heterologous venom. Sheep anti-mouse IgG conjugated to horse-radish peroxidase 
was used as conjugate at 1:8,000 dilution. Venoms: l. B. jararaca; 2, B. jararacussu; 3, B. 
alternatus; 4, B. atrox; 5, B. moojeni; 6, B. neuwiedi; 7, B. cotiara; 8, L. muta; 9, Crotalus 
durissus terrificus; 10, Crotalus d collineatus. Antivenoms: A, anti- B. alternatus; B, anti-B. 
atrox; C, anti-B. moojeni; D, anti-B. neuwiedi; C, Control: venom + conjugate. 
The mice immunised with the IC of the B. moojeni venom was killed and its spleen removed 
for fusion. Of the 256 clones obtained 176 displayed reactivity towards the specific B. 
moojeni venom in solid phase radioimmunoassay (Appendix VI). The high responders were 
cultured further and later tested for species-specificity by solid phase radioimmunoassay. 
Some clones were used for the production of ascitic fluid in mice and the ascitic fluid tested 
for specificity. None of the clone supernatants or ascitic fluids tested had any antivenom 
reactivity (some results are shown in the Appendix VI) and were discarded. The results 
show that although clones were obtained with some anti-B. moojeni activity, none 
maintained this antivenom activity. 
3.1.12.Production of species-specific antivenom using 
polyacrylamide gel slices containing antigens as 
immunising agent. 
This was another attempt to produce species-specific antivenoms in large volumes to allow 
the preparation of assays for the specific identification of venoms in fluids. To identify the 
venom components responsible for species-specificity Western blots were developed with a 
single absorbed antivenom For this a single absorbed antivenom was reacted in immunoblot 
assasy with its homologous and heterologous venoms. Fig. 3.30 (A-C) shows the 
immunostaining patterns obtained with the 2X absorbed antivenoms of B. jararacussu, (A); 
B. alternatus, (B) and B. moojeni (C) and the numbered bands, specifically stained by them, 
that were chosen for the immunisation procedure. The absorbed antivenoms for B. 
jararacussu, Fig. 3.30 (A), and for B. alternatus, Fig. 3.30 (B) stained only bands in their 
homologous venoms. In Fig. 3.30 (C) the absorbed anti-B. moojeni stained two 
homologous bands and bands on the heterologous venom of B. neuwiedi. Before 
immunising animals with the bands stained by the homologous absorbed antivenoms, they 
were eluted from polyacrylamide gels and tested for cross-reactivity by ELISA, against the 
heterologous Bothropic antivenoms. For this, 400 Jlg of each venom in 40 JlI of sample 
buffer was applied to a blank comb and separated in a non-SDSIPAGE, 7.5% gel. The gel 
strips to be cut out were identified by their position in relation to the molecular weights, as 
measure in the immunoblot assays. The eluted material for each venom was obtained from 4 
gels and after lyophylisation it was resuspended in a final voume of 500 JlI of saline. The 
amount of protein was measured by the absorbance at A 28Onm. One unit of absorbance = 1 
mg and the results are shown below: 
Venom 
B. jararacussu 
B. alternatus 
B. moojeni 
Venom bands 
Protein content (Jlg) 
126.5 
125.4 
130.9 
123.8 
136.4 
132.0 
121.1 
Venom bands were diluted in coating buffer to make up 1.0 m1 and ELISA plates were 
coated with 2 flg/well of each. In Fig. 3.31 (A-C) the results of the crossreactive assays are 
shown. All eluted venom bands exhibited a cross-reaction against the heterologous 
antivenoms tested. In Fig. 3.31 (A) the band nQ.l from B. jararacussu venom exhibited a 
higher reactivity against the absorbed homologous antivenom compared to the reactivity 
against the non-absorbed homologous and heterologous antivenoms. B. jararacussu venom 
band nQ.2 Fig. 3.31 (A) displayed similar results except against the non-absorbed anti-B. 
a/ternatus antivenom 
A 3 1 2 4-
(100,CQ)} 
I (116,(XD) 
(84,(0)) 
24 587 89 
(1""') 
(11&.l 
(1ijD)) -lolflt/llWJ ' 
a 7 10 
"-------4{ L-J 
Ab t Un 
Figure 3.30 Immunoblots showing the reaction often venom against the absorbed (Ab) and 
unabsorbed (UN) antivenoms. A, antivenom to B. jararacussu venom; B, antivenom to B. 
alternatus, C, antivenom to B. moojeni venom 25 Jlg of each venom were separated in a 
non-SDSIPAGE, 7.5%, and transferred to a nitrocellulose sheet. Antivenoms used at 1: 1,000 
dilution. Venoms are labelled as: 1: B. jararaca, 2: B. jararacussu, 3: B. alternatus, 4: B. 
atrox, 5: B. moojeni, 6: B. neuwiedi, 7: B. cotiara, 8: L. muta, 9: Crotalus durissus terrificus. 
Numbers in parentheses indicate positions of the molecular weight markers x 103 daltons. 
Conjugate was sheep anti-rabbit IgG conjugated to peroxidase used at 1:5,000 dilution. 
~ 04 g , 
 0,3 
 0,2 
1 , 2 
~ 0,8 
~ 0,6 
9 0,6 
~ 0,5 
j 0 , 4 
0 , 2 
0 , 1 
E ' E 
A c o E F 
Antl  nom. 
Anttunom. 
A B C 0 
A ntlvt no m 1 
Venom bands 
~ 82 0 3 
Figure 3.31. Venom components eluted from polyacrylamide gels were reacted against their 
homologous and heterologous antivenoms. Venoms: (A); B. jararacussu; (B), B. alternatus; 
(C), B. moojeni. Antivenoms. A, anti-B. jararaca; B, anti-B. jararacusssu, C, anti-B. 
alternatus; D, anti-B. atrox; E, anti-B. moojeni; F, anti-B. neuwiedi; G, anti- B. cotiara used 
at 1:1,000 dilution. B', C' and E' are the absorbed antivenoms to venoms (A), (B) and (C) 
respectively. (B') was used at 1: 100 dil., and (C' and E') at 1:250. Venom bands are labelled 
as in (B). 
Western blot analysis of these two B. jararacussu venom bands was carried out with 1 Jlg 
of each band being applied per lane in the gel. The bands were separately developed with 
the homologous antivenom and a heterologous antivenom to see if band( s) stained only by 
the homologous antivenom could be observed. In Fig. 3.32 the results of this experiment it 
can be observed and no specifically stained band is visible. The absorbed homologous anti-
B. jararacussu antivenom failed to stain any venom component in both venom bands tested. 
The non-absorbed homologous anti-B. jararacussu and heterologous anti-B. atrox 
antivenoms displayed different stained patterns with the two B. jararacussu venom bands 
tested. Lanes 2, 5 and 3, 6 respectively. These results did not confirm that the stained bands 
of Figures 3.30 (A) excised from the polyacrylamide gel contained the species-specific 
venom components. If the excised bands did contain the species-specific component(s) the 
result suggests that species-specificity could be due to specific epitopes only and not whole 
venom components. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
~igure 3.32 Immunoblot analysis of B. jararacussu venom components eluted from a non-SDS 
r.5% polyacrylamide gel. Venom bands stained by the absorbed antiveno~ in Figure 3.30, (A) 
~ere eluted and tested for venom specificity. Lanes 1, 2, 3: Band 1 as in Figure 3.30 (A) and 4, 5, 
i Band 2. Antivenoms: lanes 1 and 4, 2X absorbed anti-B. jararacussu, 1: 100 dilution; 2 and 5, 
m-absorbed anti-B. jararacussu, 1:1,000 dil.; 3 and 6, unabsorbed anti-B. atrox, 1:1,000; Lane 7, 
~. jararacussu venom stained by the unabsorbed anti-B. jararacussu,l: 1,000 dil. Conjugate as in 
~ig.3.30 
The failure of the absorbed anti-B. jararacussu to stain venom component(s) on both eluted 
venom bands in the Western blot analysis could indicate that: the excised bands did not 
contain the species-specific component(s), or that either the concentration of the specific 
venom component( s) was not sufficiently high or the specific epitopes were somehow 
denatured during the electro-elution process. Based on this set of results, showing the 
existence of cross-reacting venom components in the eluted bands, the immunisation of 
animals using the gel slices was not carried out. 
3.1.13.Cross-reactivity studies with antivenoms absorbed in 
glutaraldehyde venom adsorbents with proportional venom 
amounts. 
None of the approaches tried so far to isolate the species-specific venom component(s) for 
immunisation purposes were successful. Therefore it was decided to prepare larger volumes 
of the absorbed antivenoms by absorption on venom affinity adsorbents. These would be 
used for cross-reactivity studies and to identify specific venom components by ELISA and 
Western blots. 
3.1.14.Purification of IgG by DEAE 
The purification of the antivenom IgG from the absorbed antivenoms was carried out to 
allow the development of antigen capture assays using the absorbed IgGs as the capturing 
reagents. The protein concentration yielded for each purified IgG from the initial 5 ml of 
serum varied and a typical result IS shown: anti-B. jararaca, 9.3 mg; 
anti-B. jararacussu, 10.1 mg; anti-B. a/ternatus, 7.6 mg; anti-B.atrox, 12.0 mg; anti-B. 
moojeni, 11.3 mg; anti-B. neuwiedi, 19.3 mg in final volumes of 600 ,.t. Fig. 3.33 shows the 
purity of the IgG tested by immunoelectrophoresis. The reaction with the anti-whole rabbit 
serum did not reveal any other serum proteins but only a reaction similar to the anti-rabbit 
IgG antiserum The results show that there was a loss of IgG during the purification process 
as 5 m1 of hyperimmunised rabbit serum contains around 50 mg of IgG, and that an 
adequate degree of purity was achieved for the different antivenom IgGs. 
Figure 3.33. Purity of rabbit antivenom IgG isolated by DEAE column chromatography tested by 
immunoelectrophoresis against sheep anti-whole rabbit serum (1) and anti-rabbit IgG (2). 
Antivenoms are labelled as: A, anti-B. jararaca; B, anti-B. allernalus; C, anti-B. jararacussu; D, 
anti-B. atrox; E, anti-B. moojeni; F, anti-B. newuiedi. Antisera were applied in 70 Jll. Antivenoms 
4.5 flg 
3.1.15.Reproducibility of the absorption procedure 
To demonstrate that the absorption procedure could produce species-specific antivenom 
sera or antivenom IgG reliably, 2 batches of monovalent antivenom IgG were separately 
absorbed four times each in venom adsorbents with equal amounts of venom. They were 
then tested for their level of cross-reactivity. Table 3.5 shows the difference between the 
homologous and heterologous reactions as a percentage of the OD readings. The smallest 
difference is found in the B. atrox antivenom against the B. allernalus venom, (46%). 
Generally the minimum difference between the specific and the non-specific reaction is 
about two-fold. 
Table 3.5. Summary of the reactivity (as percentage of OD reading) between the species-
specific absorbed antivenoms and the homologous and heterologous venoms. 
Venoms 
Antivenoms B.jar B.jsu B. alt B. atr B. moj B. neu B. cot L. mut 
against 
B.jararaca 100% 29 (14) 50 (5) 50 (7.5) 38 (2) 30 (2) 50 (3.5) 21 (5.8) 
B. jararacussu 20 (5.5) 100% 12 (2) 14 (1.6) 47 (3) 30 (3) 1 18 
B. atrox 50 (3.5) 38 (8) 54 (2) 100% 50 (7) 50 (14) 50 (20) 24 (14) 
B. moojeni 19 (1.7) 25 (8) 9 (2) 20 (3) 100% 41 (13) 11 (1) 8 (1.8) 
B. neuwiedi 17 (4) 10 (4) 16 (3) 3.8 6.8 (1) 100% 6 8 (2) 
L. muta 16 (9) 30 (5) 14 1.6 1.8 30 (15) 15 (5) 100% 
Homologous reaction is 100%. Numbers ill brackets are standard deviation of two 
experiments. Venoms are: B. jar, B. jararaca; B. jsu, B. jararacussu; B. alt, B. alternatus; 
B. moj, B. moojeni; B. neu, B. neuwiedi; B. cot, B. cotiara; L. mut, L. muta. 
The degree of specificity achieved by the antivenoms are different from each other, as some 
absorbed antivenom, retain higher cross-reactivity against the heterologous venoms than the 
others. Absorbed anti-B. atrox displays the smallest overall specificity and the absorbed 
anti-B. neuwiedi the highest overall species-specificity. The results indicate that the 
absorption of the antivenoms yielded in an reproducible manner antivenoms with species-
specificity. 
3.1.16.Cross-reactivity studies with the absorbed antivenoms. 
As shown in Table 3.5 the absorption of monovalent antivenoms onto venom adsorbents 
yielded antivenoms with reproducible species-specificity. New batches of monovalent 
antivenom IgG were absorbed 4X each in adsorbents with proportional amounts of venom 
to test their suitability for use in diagnostic assays. 
3. 1. 16. 1. Indirect Antibody ELISA 
ELISA plates were coated with different concentrations of the Bothropic venoms. Then, to 
each plate was added only one absorbed antivenom and its reactivity against the 
homologous and heterologous venoms compared. In Fig. 3.34 (A) it can be observed that 
the absorbed anti-B. jararaca can discriminate the homologous from the heterologous 
venoms. The specific reaction is three times higher than the non-specific ones. In Fig. 3.34 
(B) the absorbed anti-B. jararacussu also discriminates the specific from the non-specific 
venoms and the specific reaction is also three times higher compared to most non-specific 
reaction except for the B. moojeni cross-reaction. In Fig. 3.34 (C) the absorbed anti-B. 
alternatus also shows higher reactivity towards the specific venom throughout the range of 
venom concentration. A higher cross-reactivity is observed only against the venom of B. 
cotiara but it is nearly constant throughout the range of venom concentration. In (D) the 
absorbed anti-B. moojeni shows similar results with specific reactivity three times higher 
than the non-specific ones except for the B. neuwiedi venom. In (E) the absorbed anti-B. 
neUWiedi antivenom shows almost complete species-specificity throughout the range of 
venom concentration with only a minor cross-reaction against the venom of B. alternatus 
that becomes more evident at the 10 f..lg/ml venom concentration. In Fig. 3.34 (F-G) 
separate cross-reactivity patterns are seen for the anti-B. atrox and anti-L. muta. They were 
tested only against each other due to their more specific geographical distribution. In (F) the 
absorbed anti-B. atrox can discriminate the specific venom from the non-specific throughout 
the range of venom concentrations and regardless of antivenom dilution. Similar results are 
obselVed in (G) for the absorbed anti-L. muta that also specifically identifies the L. mula 
venom with no cross-reaction at all with the B. atrox venom 
E 0.8 A o---e---O 
c 0/ N 
en 0.6 
0.2 0 
0.010.1 1 10 
Venom Cone. (J1.g/ml) 
E 1.0 
N 0.8 
c 0.4 
0 0.2 
0.010.1 1 10 
Venom Cone. (J1.g/ml) 
c 1.5 ~~ N 
a 0.5 
0.010.1 1 10 
Venom Cone. (JLg/ml) 
0.010.1 1 10 
Venom Cone. (J1.g/ml) 
1.5 t-
1.0 .-. 
0.010.1 1 10 
Venom Cone. (J1.g/ml) 
Venoms 
a B. jararaca 
 B. jararacussu 
V B. allernatus 
... B. atrox 
o B. moojeni 
 B. neuwiedi 
~ B. cotlara 
<> C. d. terricus 
 C. d. collineatus 
Figure 3.34 (A-E) ELISA reactivity of absorbed antivenoms against increasing concentrations of 
homologous and heterologous venoms. Different venom solutions were coated onto the plate in 
different wells. Absorbed antivenoms were separately added to wells containing the homologous or 
heterologous venom A: anti-B. jararaca at 1: 100 dilution, B: anti-B. jararacussu at 1: 100 dil, C: 
anti-B. alternatus at 1:100 dil, D: anti-B. moojeni at 1:200 dil, E: anti-B. neuwiedi at 1:200 dil. 
8 2.0 2.0 
~ F T-T 6 G /1 N C 
m / C\l .q< 1.5 I- m 1.5 - Ii ..q< E-o _ 1:100T T-T E--< ~-- :~~~ f < --- 1 :200 / <:t:: Z 1.0 - z 1.0 
e :::::::y 0 rn (fJ 
~ t-t I I r:o r-==T < 0.0 <:t:: 0.0 T T 
0.01 0.1 1 10 0.01 0.1 1 10 
Venom Cone. (}lgjml) Venom Cone. ().1g/ml) 
Figure 3.34 (F-G) Reactivity of absorbed anti-B. atrox (F) and anti-L. mula (G) against 
homologous and heterologous venoms by indirect antibody ELISA. Different venom 
solutions were separately added to different wells containing the homologous and 
heterologous venoms. F, Absorbed anti-B. atrox at 1: 100 and 1:200 dilution. G, Absorbed 
anti-L. mula at 1: 100 and 1 :200 dilution. Venoms: B. atrox T; L. mula . 
These results together indicate that the absorption of monovalent antivenoms increases the 
species-specificity and they were then able to discriminate between the specific and non-
specific venom independently of venom concentration. The results of Fig. 3.34 (F, G) also 
indicate that the species-specificity of the absorbed antivenom is independent of antivenom 
dilution, confirming the previous results in Fig. 3.20. 
3. 1. 16. 2. Antigen capture ELISA 
These experiments were carried out to see if the increased specificity towards the 
homologous venom observed in the indirect antibody ELISA could be maintained in this 
type of assay. The same set of absorbed antivenoms IgG used for the indirect antibody assay 
of Section 3.1.16.1 was used here to coat ELISA plates at 40 J.lg/ml. The absorbed 
antivenoms against the B. atrox and L. muta venoms were not used. The conjugates used 
were separately prepared for each snake venom species and were monovalent non-absorbed 
rabbit antivenom IgG fractions conjugated to alkaline phosphatase. These were supplied by 
Dr. RDG Theakston from the Venom Unit at the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
UK. In Fig. 3.35 (A-E) it can be observed that in all cases there is an increased species-
specific detection of the homologous venom. 
>=: A N 
0.15 ~ 
Z 0.10 
0 -E-< 
~ 0.05 
<:r: 0.00 
0.0010.01 0.1 1 10 100 
Venom Conc. (ug/ml) 
B V N (j,) 
0.3 r ~ 
/ E--< < z 0.2 -0 -E--< 
0.1 ~d ~ -0 if} .---- ~ CO A-
< 0.0 
0.0010.01 0.1 1 10 100 
Venom Conc. (ug/ml) 
~ 0.5 ,------------, 
g; 0.4 
< 0.3 
E=: 0.2 
< o. 0 '--___ ~.~E::::=i:~.J 
0.0010.01 0.1 1 10 100 
Venom Conc.(ug/ml) 
0 -E--< 
0.4 D 
0.0010.01 0.1 1 10 100 
Venom Conc. (ug/ml) 
0.0010.01 0.1 1 10 100 
Venom Conc. (ug/ml) 
Venoms 
 B. Jararaca 
v B. jararacussu 
~ B. alternatus 
[] B. rnoojeni 
 B. neuwiedi 
6 B. cotiara 
Figure 3.35 (A-E) Antigen-capture assay (ELISA) for homologous and heterologous venoms. 
Absorbed antivenom IgGs were coated onto plates at 40 f.1g/ml. Different venom solutions were 
added to different wells containing the homologous or heterologous antivenom IgG. Unabsorbed 
monovalent rabbit antivenom IgG, conjugated to alkaline phosphatase was used as conjugate at 
1:500. Antivenoms: A: anti-B. jararaca, B: anti-B. jararacussu, C: anti-B. aiternatus, D: anti-B. 
moojeni, E: anti-B. neuwiedi. 
These results are similar to those obtained in the indirect antibody ELISA and shown in Fig. 
3.34 (A-E). The cross-reactivities observed in Fig. 3.35 (A-E) maintain a nearly constant 
ratio to the specific reaction throughout the range of venom concentrations. It is clear that a 
degree of species-specificity was achieved and that this was not dependent on venom 
concentration. It suggests the existence of species-specific venom components or epitopes 
that would be responsible for the species-specificity. The conjugate was a monovalent non-
absorbed IgG, which indicates that the absorbed antivenoms were responsible for the 
species-specificity and these were capturing mainly, venom components containing species-
specific epitopes. The results demonstrate the potential of these absorbed reagents as tools 
in the specific detection of venoms for the diagnosis of snake bites. 
In order to increase the sensitivity of the assay, a variation of it was tested where only 
homologous reactions were assayed. The plates were coated with a 0.5% (v/v) solution of a 
commercial preparation of a polyvalent antibothropic horse F( ab')2 (Butantan Institute, 
Material and Methods). A range of venom concentrations (0.001 to 10 flg/ml) was added as 
a second layer. The same set of absorbed rabbit antivenom IgGs used in the previous 
antigen capture assays of this section was added at two different dilutions. The results show 
(Fig. 3.36 (A-D that in all cases it was possible to easily detect venom concentrations of 
0.001 flg Iml at both antivenom dilutions used. At the antivenom dilution of 1:30, even 
lower venom concentrations could probably have been detected, judging by the absorbance 
values observed. 
1.0 0.6 
0-- 1 :30 
0--1:30 
 1 :300 0.5 '"  1:300 0.8 \ 
0.4 ~"-o E c: 0.6 c: N N 
en en 
""" """ 
0 0.4 0 
a 0 0.2 
0.2 ~---------- 0.1 -"'-.. --------
0.0 0.0 
10,0 1,0 0,1 0,01 0,001 10,0 1,0 0,1 0,01 0,001 
Venom concentration (Jl.g/ml) Venom concentration (Jl.9/ml) 
1.6 1.4 
0-0 .------. --1:30 1.4 ~ 0---1:30 ___ 1:300  1 :300 1.2 \ 0 " " 
.--.~ \ 
1 .0  \ 
E 1.0 E \ c: c 0.8  \ N N \ en 
0> '. \ """ 0.8 "<t +' "0 .-------c 0.6 " 0 -0 0.6 0 0 \ \ 
0.4 .~D  
0.2 0.2 l  
0.0 0.0 
10,0 1,0 0,1 0,01 0,001 10,0 1,0 0,1 0,01 0,001 
Venom concentration (Jl.g/ml) Venom concentration (Jl.g/ml) 
Figure 3.36 (A-D) Antigen-capture assay (ELISA) of homologous venom Plates were coated 
with 5% (v/v) of polyvalent horse antibothropic F(ab')2. Venoms were added in different 
concentrations to wells containing the antibody. Absorbed rabbit antivenoms were added to wells 
containing their homologous venoms. Sheep anti-rabbit IgG conjugated to horse-radish 
peroxidase was used as conjugate at 1:20,000 dil. A: anti-B. jararaca, B: anti-B. jararacussu, C: 
anti-B. moojeni, D: anti-B. neuwiedi. 
3.1.17.Specific detection of venom antigens In normal human 
serum 
During the work, snakebite patients sera was not available to be assayed for the specific 
detection of venom An alternative was to add venom to normal human serum to mimic a 
snake bite situation and then to assay the serum by antigen capture ELISA. The same set of 
absorbed antivenom IgGs used in the results of Fig. 3.34 was used here to coat the ELISA 
plates at the same 40 tlg/ml concentration. Again the conjugate was the monovalent rabbit 
antivenom conjugated to alkaline phosphatase from the same batch used above. Fig. 3.37 
shows the homologous detection of Bothropic venoms down to the concentration of 
0.01 tlg/ml for all of the specificities tested. 
-  B. jararacussu 
() B. jararaca d~ 
V B. alternatu, I J 
: T 8 neuwiedi 'Sf II _ 
j;;_ 0 0.40 f-
 ...t 0.30 e-
f..4 0.20 e-
] 0.10 e-
T I I I 
0.01 0.1 1 10 
Venom Cone. (ug/ml) 
Figure 3.37 Antigen-capture assay (ELISA) showing the homologous detection of venoms added 
to normal human serum diluted at 1: 50. Absorbed antivenom IgG samples were coated onto the 
plates at 40 flg/ml. Different venom concentration (0.01 to 10 J.lg/ml) were. added to ~erent 
wells containing the homologous absorbed antivenom IgG. Unabsorbed antlVenom rabbIt IgG 
cOnjugated to alkaline phosphatase was used as conjugate at 1: 50 dilution. Results are the means 
of three experiments. 
To test the specificity of this assay, plates were similarly coated with the same set of 
absorbed IgGs. Plates were coated with antivenom IgGs from only one specificity and a 
single concentration of the homologous and heterologous venoms added to the plates. The 
same batch of alkaline phosphatase conjugates were added to the plates containing the 
coating IgG with the same specificity. In Fig. 3.38 (A-D) it can be observed that the B. 
jararaca venom (A) could be specifically detected in human serum. The same was observed 
for the venoms of B. jararacussu, (B); B. alternatus (C) and B. neuwiedi, (D). The venom 
of B. alternatus (C) displayed cross-reactivity only with the venom of B. cotiara of about 
30%. The venom of B. neuwiedi also displayed a more significant cross-reactivity against 
the venom of B. jararaca, up to about 30%. The other venoms exhibit lower levels of 
cross-reactivity against all of the heterologous venoms. The venoms tested could be 
species-specifically detected in normal human serum suggesting the possibility of using 
these absorbed reagents for diagnostic assays. 
100 A 100 B 
% % 50 
0 0 JAR JSU ALT KOJNEUCOT 
JAR JSU ALT KOJNEUCOT 
Venom.s Venom.s 
100 f- C 100 D 
75 I- 75 
50 I- 50 
25 f- 25 
0 0 ""-
JAR JSU ALT KOJNEUCOT JAR JSU ALT KOJNEUCOT 
Venom.s Venoms 
Figure 3.38 (A-D) Species-specific venom detection (ELISA). Different venom solutions at 
1~gml in normal human serum diluted 1:50 were added to plates coated with a single absorbed 
antivenom IgG at 40 flg/ml. Un-absorbed antivenom IgG conjugated to alkaline phosphatase was 
used as conjugate at 1: 100 dilution. Antivenom: A: anti-B. jararaca, B: anti-B. jararacussu, C: 
anti-B. moojeni, D: anti-B. neuwiedi. Results are means of two experiments. 
3.2. Immunoblot analyses of venom species-specific components 
It was shown previously in Section 3.1.12 that the absorbed antivenoms stained specific 
venom components on the homologous venoms in Western blot assays. This was shown for 
the B. jararacussu, B. a/ternatus and B. moojeni venoms. Here this analysis is extended to 
other venoms that were electrophoresed in non-SDS gels and SDS gels prior to the transfer 
to the nitro-cellulose sheets. Pools of venoms and venoms from individual snakes from 
different geographic locations were used in order to verify if the specifically stained 
components were trully a species trait, or not. 
3.2.1. Western blot analysis of Brazilian venoms separated by 
non-50S and 50S/PAGE 
The objective of these assays was to visualise specific stained bands by the absorbed 
antivenoms in the homologous venoms. The non-SDS gels were used to avoid possible 
denaturation of any venom epitope(s) responsible for species-specificity. It was shown 
before (Section 3.1.12) that there was no loss of reactivity in the non-SDS conditions for 
three venoms tested. Nonetheless the non-SDS assays were carried out before the SDS 
assays for all venoms. In Fig. 3.39 (A) the absorbed anti-B. jararaca antivenom was reacted 
to the homologous and heterologous venoms separated in a non-SDS gel. Two stained 
bands were observed in the homologous venom stained by the 3X absorbed anti-B. jararaca 
antivenom and there was no staining of any heterologous venom component. Plate (B) is a 
similar experiment to (A) but the venoms were electrophoresed in a SDS gel and the nitro-
cellulose was immunostained with the 4X absorbed anti-B. jararaca IgG from the same 
batch used in Fig. 3.34. Two strongly stained bands can be seen in the homologous venom 
with approximate molecular masses of 60 kDa and 22 kDa with no corresponding stained 
bands in the heterologous venom Other bands stained in the homologous venom show 
corresponding stained bands with same molecular mass in some heterologous venoms. 
Analysing the results of (A) and (B) it can be concluded that one of the specifically stained 
venom components could be a small basic protein because in the non-SDS gel both bands 
migrated to the upper part of the gel, characteristic of proteins with a basic isoelectric point 
and in the SDS gel one of them shows a small molecular mass of about 18 kDa. The 
heterologous stained bands observed in (B) could be explained by an incomplete degree of 
species-specificity achieved by the 4X absorbed antivenom IgG or by SDS conditions 
exposing some epitopes with lower affinity that react with the still present cross-reacting 
antibodies in the absorbed antivenom IgG. These results strongly suggest the existence of 
species-specific component(s) or epitopes in the venom of B. jararaca. 
WMJ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 UN 
1 2 3 
4 5 6 7 8 9 C LMW 
Figure 3.39 Immunoblot analysis showing species-specific components of Bothrops jararaca 
venom A: Venoms were separated in a non-SDS PAGE 7.5% gel and transferred to a nitro-
cellulose membrane. Absorbed antivenom was added to NC lanes numbered fro.m 1 to 10 at 1: 800 
dil. Unabsorbed anti-B. jararaca was added to the homologous venom at 1:2,000 as control (UN). 
MW: Molecular weight standards. B: Venoms were separated in a SDSfPAGE 10% gel and 
transferred to NC. Absorbed antivenom IgG was added to NC lanes numbered 1 to 9 at 1:800 dil .. 
Un-absorbed anti-B. jararaca was added to B. jararaca venom at 1:2,000 dil. as control (C). 
Venoms in A and B are labelled as: 1: B. jararaca; 2: B. jararacussu; 3: B. alternatus; 4: B. atrox; 
5: B. moojeni; 6: B. neuwiedi; 7: B. cotiara; 8: L. muta; 9 C. durissus terrificus; 10: C. durissus 
collineatus. LMW and HMW, low and high molecular weight standards. 
Fig. 3.40 (A, B) show the results for the B. jararacussu venom A different batch of 
absorbed antivenom from the one used in Fig. 3.30 was prepared and used here in (A). 
A single diffuse band was stained in the homologous B. jararacussu venom by the absorbed 
anti-B. jararacussu antivenom No heterologous venom bands were observed. 
wwv 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 UN 
LMW C 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 1 2 HMW 
Figure 3.40 Immunoblot analysis showing Bothrops jararacussu species-specific components. A: 
Venoms were separated in a non-SDS PAGE 7.5% gel and transferred to a nitro-cellulose 
membrane. Absorbed anti-B. jararacussu antivenom was added to lanes numbered from 1 to 10 
at 1:600 dilution. Unabsorbed anti-B. jararacussu antivenom was added to the homologous 
venom at 1:2,000 as control (UN). MW: Molecular weight standards. B: Venoms were separated 
in a SDSIPAGE 10% gel and transferred to nitrocellulose. Absorbed antivenom IgG was added 
to lanes numbered 1 to 9 at 1: 800 dil. Unabsorbed anti-B. jararacussu was added to B. 
"araracussu venom at 1:2,000 dil. as control (C) . Venoms in A and B are labelled as: 1: B. 
"araraca; 2: B. jararacussu; 3: B. alternatus; 4: B. atrox; 5: B. moojeni; 6: B. neuwiedi; 7: B. 
cotiara; 8: L. muta; 9 C. durissus terrificus; 10: C. durissus collineatus. LMW and HMW, low 
and high molecular weight standards in kDa. 
In (B) the venom separation was carried out in a SDS gel and the nitro-cellulose was 
immunostained with 4X absorbed anti-B. jararacussu IgG (same used in the results of 
Fig. 3.34). Two specific stained bands were seen in the homologous venom of approximate 
molecular mass of 84 kDa and 116 kDa and a heterologous stained band was seen in the 
venom of B. neuwiedi with molecular mass above 119 kDa. The heterologous stained band 
in Fig. 3.40 (B) could be explained as in Fig. 3.39 (B). The absorbed anti-B. a/ternatus 
(Figure 3.41 (~ B stains bands only in the homologous venom Figure 341 (A), is the 
same pattern as Fig. 3.30 (B) and the venom separation was carried out in a non-SDS gel. 3 
specifically stained bands were seen with no stained band with the heterologous venoms. In 
Figure 3.41 (B), 5 specifically stained bands are visualised. The approximate molecular 
masses vary from 24 kDa for one band, 43 kDa and 45 kDa for two other bands. There is 
one band between 66 and 84 kDa and one in the range of 119 kDa. The results indicate the 
existence of species-specific venom components of B. a/ternatus. The higher number of 
stained bands in the SDS gel could be due to a better separation of venom-specific 
components, with comparable charge-mass ratio but different molecular masses. Also the 
SDS conditions might have exposed epitopes in the specific venom. 
1 2 4 5 6 7 8 9 
(1Sl,(D)) 
(116,fD)) 
(84,(11)) 
~l ________ ~ ______________ ~.\ ~ 
HMW 3~--=-1 --.;.~_ 
Figure 3.41 Immunoblot analysis showing Bothrops a/ternatus species-specific components. A: 
Venoms were separated in a non-SDS PAGE 7.5% gel and transferred to a nitro-cellulose 
membrane. Absorbed anti-B. a/ternatus antivenom was added to lanes numbered from 1 to 10 at 
1: 1,000 dilution (dil). Unabsorbed anti-B. a/ternatus antivenom was added to the homologous 
venom at 1:2,000 dil.as control (UN). MW: Molecular weight standards. B: Venoms were 
separated in a SDSIP AGE 10% gel and transferred to nitrocellulose. Absorbed antivenom IgG 
was added to lanes numbered 1 to 9 at 1:800 dil. Unabsorbed anti-B. a/ternatus added to B. 
alternatus venom at 1:2,000 dil. as control (C) . Venoms in A and B are labelled as: 1: B. 
jararaca; 2: B. jararacussu; 3: B. a/ternatus; 4: B. atrox; 5: B. moojeni; 6: B. neuwiedi; 7: B. 
cotiara; 8: L. muta; 9 C. durissus terrificus; 10: C. durissus collineatus. LMW and HMW, low 
and high molecular weight standards in kDa. 
Figure 3.42 (A) shows the immunoblot results for the B. moojeni venom in the non-SDS 
gel. Two bands are observed in the homolo ous venom 
--~----------------------------~ 
(A) 5 1 2 _ J 6 7 8 9 5 
(1.,..,) (1. 
(M.IID) -(51,11) 
(48,D) 
(..-m) 
--------------~{ ~ 
Ab  Un 
5 1 2 3 4 _6 7 8 MW 
Figure 3.42 Immunoblot analysis showing Bothrops moojeni species-specific 
components. A: Venoms were separated in a non-SDS PAGE 7.5% gel and transferred 
to a nitro-cellulose membrane. Absorbed anti-B. moojeni antivenom was added to lanes 
numbered from 1 toq : at 1: 1,000 dilution. Unabsorbed anti-B. moojeni antivenom was 
added to the homologous venom at 1:2,000 as a control (UN). B: Venoms were 
separated in a SDSIPAGE 10% gel and transferred to nitrocellulose. Absorbed anti-B. 
moojeni venom IgG was added to lanes numbered 1 to 8 at 1:800 dil. Un-absorbed 
anti-B. moojeni was added to B. moojeni venom at 1:2,000 dil. as control (C) . Venoms 
in A and B are labelled as: 1: B. jararaca; 2: B. jararacussu; 3: B. a/ternatus; 4: B. 
atrox; 5: B. moojeni; 6: B. neuwiedi; 7: B. cotiara; 8: L. muta; 9 C. durissus terrificus. 
Numbers in brackets and MW, are molecular weight standards in kDa. 
Cross-reactive stained bands were seen in the venom of B. neuwiedi. In the SDS gel Fig. 
3.42 (B) there is one single stained band in the homologous venom with no cross-reactive 
stained band in the heterologous venoms. Its molecular mass was in the range of 30 to 36 
kDa. The result indicates that specific venom components are also present in the venom of 
B. moojeni. The results for the B. neuwiedi venom are in Figure 3.43. In the non-SDS ge~ 
Figure 3.43 (A), one band was specifically stained by the absorbed homologous antivenom 
There is not non-specific staining obselVed. In the SDSIPAGE plate (B) three specifically 
stained protein bands are seen. The first has a molecular mass (MW) between 36.4 and 45 
kDa. The second has a MW of 36.4 kDa and the third has a MW of24 kDa. The results for 
all venoms tested indicated the existence of species-specific epitopes. The different number 
of stained bands between the SDS and non-SDS gels could also indicate that some of these 
venom components bearing the specific epitopes could be oligomers and their sub-units 
were separated in the SDS treatment. 
HMW 6 1 2 3 4 5 7 8 9 6 
48.5-
Figure 3.43 Immunoblot analysis showing Bothrops neuwiedi species-specific components. 
A: Venoms were separated in a non-SDS PAGE 7.5% gel and transferred to a nitro-
cellulose membrane. Absorbed anti-B. neuwiedi antivenom was added to lanes numbered 
from 1 to q . at 1: 1,000 dilution. Unabsorbed anti-B. neuwiedi antivenom was added to the 
homologous venom at 1:2,000 as control (UN). MW: Molecular weight standards. B: 
Venoms were separated in a SDS/P AGE 10% gel and transferred to nitrocellulose. 
Absorbed antivenom IgG was added to lanes numbered 1 to 9 at 1: 1,000 dil. Un-absorbed 
anti-B. neuwiedi was added to B. neuwiedi venom at 1:2,000 dil. as a control (C) . Venoms 
in A and B are labelled as: 1: B. jararaca; 2: B. jararacussu; 3: B. alternatus; 4: B. atrox; 5: 
B. moojeni; 6: B. neuwiedi; 7: B. cotiara; 8: L. muta; 9 C. durissus terrificus; 10: C. 
durissus collineatus. LMW and HMW, low and high molecular weight standards in kDa. 
The pattern of specific bands for the L. muta venom, for the non-SDS gel is shown in 
Figure 3.44 where specific stained bands can be seen. 
MW g. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 9, 10 UN 
Figure 3.44 Immunoblot analysis showing Lachesis muta species-specific components. 
Venoms were separated in a non-SDS PAGE 7.5% gel and transferred to a nitro-cellulose 
membrane. Absorbed anti-L. muta antivenom was added to lanes numbered from 1 to 10 at 
1:800 dil. Unabsorbed anti-L. mula antivenom was added to the homologous venom at 
1:2,000 as a control (UN). Venoms are labelled as: 1: B. jararaca; 2: B. jararacussu; 3: B. 
alternatus; 4: B. atrox; 5: B. moojeni; 6: B. neuwiedi; 7: B. cotiara; 8: L. muta; 9: C. 
durissus terrificus; 10: C. durissus collineatus. MW, molecular weight standards in kDa. 
Figure 3.45 is the immunoblot result, (non-SDS) of the panel of venoms stained by their 
homologous absorbed antivenoms. The staining pattern very much resembles the ones 
described above in Figures 3.39 (A) to 3.44 (A). Not shown before and included here in this 
assay are the results for the venoms of B. atrox and B. cotiara. The B. atrox pattern (Figure 
3.45, n2.4) show two clearly identified visible broad stained bands. Lane 7 of this same 
Figure show the results for the B. cotiara venom Three bands are visualised. Lane 6 has the 
results for the B. neuwiedi venom and this time a broad and diffuse band is seen in contrast 
with the ones in Figure 3.43 (A). This pattern tended to appear in some non-SDSIPAGE 
immunoblot assays of B. neuwiedi, although no non-specific band was ever stained. All the 
absorbed antivenoms used in the assay of Figure 3.45 were used at 1:500. In Fig. 3.46 the 
results show an immunoblot study of the venoms of B. atrox and L. muta. It is observed 
that the absorption of the monovalent specific antivenoms abolishes the cross-reactivity 
between the two venoms indicated here by the absence of heterologous stained bands by the 
two absorbed antivenoms. 
~c 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
Figure 3.45 Immunoblot of the panel of venoms showing the specific bands stained by their 
homologous absorbed antivenoms. Venoms were separated in a non-SDSIPAGE, 7.5% gel and 
transferred to a nitro-cellulose membrane. Venoms and antivenoms: 1: B. jararaca, 2: B. 
"araracussu, 3: B. alternatus, 4: B. atrox, 5: B. moojeni, 6: B. neuwiedi, 7: B. cotiara, 8: L. muta. 
All antivenoms were diluted 1:500. C: contro~ conjugate alone. MW: molecular weight standards 
in kDa. 
MW 9 9 4 4 4 4 9 9 
A B A B c o o 
Figure 3.46 Immunoblot analysis of B. atrox and L. mula venoms. Venoms were separated in 
a non-SDS gel and transferred to nitrocellulose and reacted with their homologous and 
I heterologous antivenoms. Venoms: 4, B. atrox; 9, L. mula. Antivenoms: A, Un-absorbed anti-
L. mula at 1:2,000 dilution. B, absorbed anti-L. mula at 1:1,000 dil. C, Un-absorbed anti-B. 
atrox at 1:2,000 dil .. D, absorbed anti-B. atrox at 1: 1,000 dil. MW: molecular weight 
standards in kDa. 
3.2.2.ldentification of the species-specific components on 
venoms from individual snakes of the same species 
Venoms individually extracted from single specimens of the same species were analysed by 
immunoblots for the presence of the species-specific components shown to exist in the 
venom pools. If present, the results would strongly corroborate the indication of our 
previous results of the existence of species-specific venom epitopes. It would also indicate 
that the specific staining patterns obtained with the venom pools were not due to reactivity 
with any contaminating epitope( s) from a single venom in the 'lJool" used. The same batch 
of absorbed antivenoms used in the previous section to stain the immunoblots carried out in 
SDS conditions was employed in these experiments. In Figure 3.47 all of the five venom 
specimens contain the two bands specific for the B. jararacussu venom. It is possible to 
observe differences in the proportional quantities of the specifically stained venom bands in 
some of the venoms. Venoms nQ 4 and 5 are from the same geographical area and show 
LMW P 1 2 3 4 5 HMW P 1 2 3 4 5 
Figure 3.47 Immunoblot of analysis of Bothropic venoms from individual snakes. Venoms from 
individual snakes of the Bothrops jararacussu species and from different geographic regions were 
separated in a 10% SDSIPAGE gel, and transferred to nitrocellulose. A: Venoms were reacted 
with their homologous absorbed antivenom at 1:800 dil. B: Venoms were reacted with their 
homologous unabsorbed antivenom at 1:2,000 dil. Venoms in A and B are labelled as: 1: 
''Ipatinga''; 2: "Guaraciaba"; 3: ''Ponte Nova"; 4: ''Ponte Nova"; 5: "Sabin6polis". HMW and 
LMW are high and low molecular weight standards, respectively in kDa. 
In Figure 3.48 similar results are observed for the B. moojeni venom. All venoms showed a 
strongly stained band with molecular weight of 36 kDa present also in all venom patterns 
stained by the unabsorbed specific antivenom. 
LMW P 1 
2 3 4 
5 HMW P 1 2 3 4 5 
Figure 3.48 Immunoblot of analysis of Bothropic venoms from individual snakes. Venoms from 
individual snakes of the Bothrops moojeni species and from different geographic regions were 
separated in a 10% SDSIPAGE geL and transferred to nitro-cellulose. A: Venoms were reacted 
with their homologous absorbed antivenom 1: 1,000 dilution. B: Venoms were reacted with their 
homologous un-absorbed antivenom at 1: 2,000 dilution. Venoms in A and B are labelled as: 1: 
"Araxa"; 2: ''Born Despacho"; 3: "Catalao"; 4: "Caparao"; 5: ''Nova Ponte". HMW and LMW are 
high and low molecular weight standards, respectively, in kDa. 
In Figure 3.49 the results are shown for B. neuwiedi venoms and again the specific 
components are present in all venoms tested. All venoms have the bands with molecular 
weight of around 36.5 and 45 kDa and a band of 24 kDa. Here too differences in the 
proportional quantities of these bands for each individual snake venom are observed. 
Venom nQ 1 from Araxa and nQ 5 from Nova Ponte do not show the band with molecular 
weight of 36.4 kDa. There is a greater variability within the venom patterns stained by the 
absorbed anti-B. neuwiedi antivenom than seen with the venoms of B. moojeni and B. 
jararacussu. 
LMW P 1 2 3 4 5 P 1 2 3 4 5 HMW 
Figure 3.49 Immunoblot of analysis of Bothropic venoms from individual snakes. Venoms from 
individual snakes of the Bothrops neuwiedi species and from different geographic regions were 
separated in a 10% SDSIPAGE gel and transferred to nitrocellulose. A: Venoms were reacted with 
their homologous absorbed antivenom at 1:1,000 dilution. B: Venoms were reacted with their 
homologous unabsorbed antivenom 1:2,000. Venoms in A and B are labelled as: 1: ''Born 
Despacho"; 2: "Catalao"; 3: ''Igarapora''; 4: ''Ponta Pora"; 5: ''Ub erab a". HMW and LMW are 
high and low molecular weight standards, respectively in kDa. 
These Western blots results show that the specifically stained venom components present in 
the venom pool of a single species of snake are also present in the individual venom from 
specimens of the same species and from different geographical regions. This strongly 
suggests that there are venom c t b . . omponen s eanng epltopes that could be genetIc markers 
of species of snakes. 
In Figure 3.50 is shown the geographical distribution of the snakes in Brazil from which the 
individual snakes venoms were obtained. 
No. a map 
l-Araxa 
2- Bom Despacho 
/I II 
3-Cataliio 
4-Caparao B. moojali 
5- Guaradaba 1 1 
6-lgarapori 
7-Ipatinga 4 4 
8- Nova Ponte /I 8 
9- Ponta Pori 
10- Ponte Nova B. neuwiedi 
11- Sabinopolis 
12- UbEraba S 41 
/I 12 
Figure 3.50. Map of Brazil showing the geographic distribution of the snakes from 
which the venoms from individuals were obtained. 
3.3. Purification of B. jararaca species-specific component 
Based on immunoblots results where the absorbed anti-B. jararaca antivenom stained two 
venom components species-specifically, a purification of these venom component(s) was 
attempted by affinity chromatography. Previous attempts to isolate specific components of 
B. jararacussu by elution from a polyacrylamide gel slice had no success. Here the 
purification of these components was tried by affinity chromatography. A batch of anti-B. 
jararaca IgG, absorbed 3X, was insolubilized onto Protein-A Sepharose-CL-4B. 
B. jararaca venom was added to the column and the specific component eluted (see 
Material and Methods). The eluates yieded a total of 421 Jlg of protein per 500 J.l. Eighty 
five Jll of the eluate was mixed with 43 Jll of 2X sample buffer. From this solution, 16 Jll 
(8.9 Jlg) was applied to each lane of a 10% SDS-PAGE gel. The purification was tested by 
immunoblot assay using the non-absorbed monovalent antivenom to the other Bothropic 
venoms studied to test for any cross-reactivity with the eluted sample. In the results (Fig. 
3.51) the 4X absorbed anti-B. jararaca (same batch used in Figure 3.44(A reacted with 
venom components of molecular weight around 48,500 kDa; 36,500 kDa, and only slightly 
with venom components at an approximate molecular weight of 24 and 22 kDa (the last 
three reactions not clearly visible in the photograph). The non-absorbed anti-B. jararaca 
reacted with 4 venom components at the same approximate molecular weight as the 
absorbed anti-B. jararaca. The component with approximate molecular weight (22 kDa) is 
probably one of the specific components of B. jararaca (see Fig. 3.39 (B. There is very 
little cross-reaction of the heterologous non-absorbed antivenoms with this venom 
component. The heterologous antivenoms did however react strongly with the other venom 
components eluted from the B. jararaca venom The anti-B. neuwiedi antivenom showed 
very little cross-reaction, and with only one of the B. jararaca venom components. In Fig. 
3.39 (B), the other specifically stained venom component has an approximate molecular 
weight of 50 kDa, here, all antivenoms tested (except for the non-absorbed anti-B. 
neuwiedi) show a strong reaction against a venom component at the same approximate 
molecular weight. This could be corroborating our previous suggestion that, either the 
species-specific components share a same molecular weight to non-specific components or 
that specificity might be related to specific epitopes and not to whole venom components. 
The results suggest that species-specific components for the B. jararaca venom could have 
been partially purified, although further studies are needed for a confirmation of this result. 
MW 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 MW 
Figure 3.51 Immunoblot of affinity purified B. jararaca venom components. Purified antigen was 
separated in 10%, SDSIP AGE gel, without reducing conditions. After the transfer the 
nitrocellulose was cut into strips containing the isolated venom components. Each strip was then 
reacted with one of the antivenoms. Antivenoms: 1, 4X absorbed anti-B. jararaca; 2, Non-
absorbed anti-B. jararaca; 3 non-absorbed anti-B. jararacussu; 4, non-absorbed anti-B. alternatus; 
5, non-absorbed anti-B. atrox; 6, non-absorbed anti-B. moojeni; 7, Non-absorbed anti-B. neuwiedi; 
8, non-absorbed anti-B. cotiara; Control: 9, whole venom reacted with the non-absorbed anti-B. 
araraca. The absorbed antivenom was used at 1:500 dilution and others were used at 1:1,000 dil. 
MW: molecular weight standards in kDa. 
4. DISCUSSION 
4.1. The search for species-specific antigens in Bothrops venoms 
As noted in the Introduction, snakebite is a medical problem in many countries [Warrell 
1992; WHO 1981] and although mortality has fallen in many places, morbidity statistics 
remain high. The diagnosis of snakebite is not possible without the capture and 
identification of the offending snake by experts. Immunological methods have been regarded 
as the possible way to achieve the identification of snake venoms in body fluids of patients. 
Within individual snake species, venom antigenic variability has posed a problem for the 
development of specific diagnostic assays for snakebite. The identification of species-
specific markers in the venoms is seen as the solution for the development of such specific 
assays and for reliable and specific studies on the kinetic of envenoming to be carried out. 
In the first part of this study we focused on the immunological characterisation of the 
venoms in order to be able to define the best strategies that would allow the visualisation of 
species-specific markers for each of the venoms, if they existed. 
PAGE has been used before by a number of research groups to study the antigenic 
characteristics of venoms, including the genus Bothrops [Assakura et al., 1992; Jimenez-
Porras, 1964; Tan and Ponnudura~ 1992b]. The results are conflicting, as some authors 
support the possibility of characterising venoms by this method whilst others disagree. Our 
results indicate the possibility of using PAGE for the interspecies differentiation of Bothrops 
venoms, although it must be emphasised that we only used pools of venoms and so 
individuals and regional characteristics would have been diluted and not observed in the 
results. Nonetheless the results show that the venoms can be specifically identified by their 
pattern. 
Studies on the cross-reactivities of the Bothrops venoms have been carried out before, and 
extensive interspecific cross reactions have been obselVed [Silles-Villarroel et al., 1974]. 
The work of Silles-Villarroel focused on the cross-reaction of B. jararaca venom and its 
specific antivenom against other Bothrops venoms using the immunoelectrophoresis 
technique. His results showed that the anti-B. jararaca serum had more specificity towards 
the specific venom as judged by the number of precipitin lines visible after protein staining 
with Coomassie Blue. In our studies all the venoms and antivenoms of the Bothrops species 
in our study panel were reacted against each other. In accordance with the previous study 
we did find an extensive interspecies cross-reaction but could not reproduce results in 
relation to the number of precipitin lines of B. jararaca antivenom against the specific and 
heterologous venoms. The above cited authors used as a starting concentration of 
antivenom a dilution that would neutralise 4 mg/ml of the specific venom This is a relative 
measure since each antivenom can present different specificity and avidity towards its 
specific venom, hence their initial IgG concentration for each antivenom might have been 
different. We used weight (a basic standard) per volume as the concentration of IgG for 
each antisera. In this manner all antisera had the same amount of IgG to react against their 
specific and heterologous venom In contrast with the previous study the anti-B. jararaca 
showed more bands against the venoms of B. atrox and B. alternatus than against its 
specific venom Our results also showed that some venoms reacted more strongly, as judged 
by the number of precipitin lines, with some heterologous antivenoms than with their 
homologous antivenom, as exemplified by the anti-B. neuwiedi against the B. jararaca 
venom Unfortunately the lines were not clear enough and it was not possible to count them 
for a more detailed comparison. 
Quantitative cross-reactivity studies of Bothrops venoms has been previously carried out 
[Dias da Silva, et al., 1989]. Using end-point titration for ELISA and gel double diffusion 
the authors reported that some antivenoms were strong, medium or weak reactors towards 
their specific and heterologous venoms. End-point titration is not a reliable method, as it is 
difficult to determine the end-point. The authors also did not specify the concentrations of 
IgG in each antiserum used. Their results show that B. atrox is a weak reactor even against 
its own venom in contrast with our results. The inhibition studies performed by us showed 
that B. atrox is the most reactive venom and by this evaluation is a strong reactor, as judged 
by the amount (less than Iflg ) of the venom needed to inhibit the specific and some 
heterologous antivenoms. Unfortunately the amount of some of the venoms necessary to 
inhibit by 50% the specific and heterologous reactions fell off the curve on either side thus 
not allowing a more precise determination of their 50% inhibition points. Even so a 
classification based on the results was possible and it did correlate well with our other 
cross-reactivity results. 
The 2D-IEP studies performed by us on snake venoms have not been reported in any other 
published work on Bothrops species. The results were interesting in showing that the 
patterns for each venom greatly differ from each other, indicating antigenic differences. The 
results where the monovalent antivenoms were used in the reference gel allowed the 
differentiation of the specific venoms. The use of the intermediate gel allowed the 
visualisation of specific components for B. atrox and B. moojeni venoms. The controls did 
not work properly due possibly to differences in the specificity and antigenicity of the 
different batches of antisera used. The failure in not showing the specific components for 
other venoms can be attributed to non-ideal conditions for each case. In another published 
study [Matthiesen, et a., 1989] it was shown that some peaks were only seen by 
radioactivity probing, which was not used here. 
The first part of the study, despite the shortcomings of some of the assays, was crucial for it 
demonstrated the existence of species-specific components for some of the Bothrops 
venoms. In addition it provided interesting information on the crossreactivities and antigenic 
composition of Bothropic venoms. 
The second part of this study focused primarily on producing species-specific antivenoms, 
identifying species-specific components for the other Bothropic venoms in the study and on 
characterising and isolating these components. 
The production of species-specific antivenoms was first attempted by immunising rabbits 
with the immune complexes of the species-specific components excised from the 2D-IEP 
agarose gels as shown before [Kroll, 1981]. Rabbits received the immune complexes in FCA 
for the first immunisation and in FIA for the subsequent injections. Immune complexes from 
the venoms of B. moojeni, B. neuwiedi and B. atrox were used. The rabbits sera were 
assayed by ELISA for the presence of antivenom activity towards the specific venom. 
Unfortunately no immune response was detected in any of the assays, probably due to 
insufficient amount of the immunising antigens injected and also probably due to the time 
gap between the immunisations. 
In a second attempt to produce species-specific antivenoms the cross-reacting antibodies 
from the monovalent antivenoms were absorbed by affinity adsorption onto a venom 
adsorbent. This approach yielded excellent results and it was possible to produce species-
specific antivenoms for anti-B. jararaca, anti-B. jararacussu, anti-B. a/lernalus, anti-B. 
atrox, anti-B. moojeni, anti-B. neuwiedi and anti-L. mula. The venom adsorbents were 
prepared using glutaraldehyde or polyacrylamide gel beads as the support matrix. The first 
yielded the best results and variations of it were tried, with species-specificity being 
achieved in all cases. The adsorption experiments were important also in confirming the 
existence of antigenic similarities between the venoms, as the adsorption onto a venom 
adsorbent containing a single venom would decrease the absorbed antivenom's cross-
reactivity against venoms not present in the adsorbent. The antivenoms were tested for 
species-specificity by antigen capture or indirect antibody ELISA and species-specificity 
was observed in all cases throughout a range of different antivenom dilutions and venom 
concentrations. The cross-reactivity studies of the absorbed antivenoms indicate that the 
species-specificity is independent of antivenom dilution or venom concentration. In studies 
carried out by other workers, antivenom or sample dilution was often used to reduce the 
cross-reactivity [Coulter, et al., 1980]. Even so such assays proved to be unreliable, giving 
poor specificity [Cox, et ai., 1992; Theakston, 1989b]. The sensitivity of either the indirect 
antibody or antigen-capture assay in our studies is about 10 ng/ml, which compares well 
with previous workers, [Coulter, et al., 1980; Cox, et al., 1992; Labrousse, et al., 1988] 
where the whole venom was detected in concentration ranges of 5 ng/mI to 50 ng/mI. 
Another important point to consider is that the assay developed in our study is detecting 
only some of the venom components and not the whole venom and yet an expected loss of 
sensitivity is not observed. The sensitivity of the assay was improved in an antigen-capture 
assay, using polyvalent antivenom as the coating layer and the absorbed antivenom as the 
second antibody, followed by an anti-rabbit conjugate, concentrations of 1 ng/mI could then 
be detected. 
Monoclonal antibodies have been employed in snake venom research for the study of venom 
toxins and other venom components. They have been used for mapping epitopes, for 
neutralisation studies and cross-reactivity studies [Menez, 1991]. We tried to produce 
monoclonal antibodies by immunising mice with venom immune complexes prepared by 
mixing together the absorbed antivenoms and their homologous venoms. The sera of the 
mice immunised with the B. moojeni and B. neuwiedi immune complexes, when tested for 
cross-reactivity against the other venoms of the study, showed an increased species-
specificity, but a high degree of cross-reactivity was observed against the venoms of B. 
jararaca, B. jararacussu and B. neuwiedi for the mice immunised with the B. moojeni 
immune complex, and against B. jararaca, B. jararacussu and B. moojeni, for the mice 
immunised with the B. neuwiedi immune complex. These results do nevertheless indicate 
the possibility of raising species-specific antivenoms in animals using venom immune 
complexes of absorbed antivenoms. Evidently additional steps should be taken to abolish 
the remaining cross-reactivities and these should include: further absorption of the 
antivenom on the venom adsorbents, additional washing steps of the immune complexes, 
avoiding the addition of anti-rabbit IgG used to increase the immune complex yield. This 
last step also increases the precipitation of non-specific immune complexes. 
Despite the cross-reactivity observed hybridomas were established using the spleen from the 
mice immunised with the B. moojeni immune complexes. Clones showing anti-B. moojeni 
activity were further cultured but when tested for species-specificity none of the previously 
responding clones exhibited any antivenom activity. The failure of the clones in maitaining 
the antivenom acitivity could possibly be explained by most commom causes, lost of 
chromosomes or clones being overgrown by irrelevant cells. Infection, another cause of loss 
of activity did not occur in the clones tested. 
The identification of species-specific venom components is an important factor for the 
detection, and kinetic studies, of envenoming [Menez, 1991]. The absorbed antivenoms 
were used as probes in immunoblot assays to detect in their homologous venoms the 
existence of specific components. Species-specific components were identified for the 
venoms of B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, B. alternatus, B. moojeni, B. neuwiedi, L. muta and 
possibly for B. atrox and B. cotiara. It is interesting to note that their molecular weights 
vary between each species, which suggests that they could belong to different classes of 
proteins. Another point of interest is that the molecular weights of these components 
indicate that their cleareance from the victim's body by glomerular filtration should be 
minimal. It implies, therefore, that these components will have to be either degraded by the 
body's enzymatic system or depleted by antivenom which, in either case, suggests their 
importance in the study of the kinetics of envenoming. In fact as predicted by Menez, 
[Menez, 1991], "It should be stressed in particular that venoms are mixtures of toxic and 
non-toxic components which vary in proportion with the age, the sex, the environment, etc. 
of the animals. Such a variability makes the quantification of an injected venom in a patient 
difficult. Indeed, antibodies used for detection could be raised against a venom (or a mixture 
of venoms) which may be somewhat different from the particular injected venom Only the 
search for a defined antigen using specific antibodies can give an unambiguous answer." The 
components here identified appear to fulfil such requirements. 
Based on preliminary venom immunoblot assays showing bands with species-specificity 
characteristics, polyacrylamide gel bands where cut out and their contents eluted and tested 
for cross-reactivity by ELISA. Venoms from B. jararacussu, B. aiternatus, and B. moojeni 
were used. The protein contents eluted from the gels cross-reacted with the unabsorbed 
heterologous antivenoms. In all venoms, some of the bands tested were later confirmed as 
carriers of the specific components. These results indicate that other components are 
present in the bands stained by the absorbed antivenoms. The material eluted from the B. 
jararacussu gel bands were tested by immunoblot assay. The absorbed antivenom failed to 
react with the contents of either of the two excised bands but the unabsorbed specific 
antivenom and the un-absorbed heterologous antivenoms reacted with the eluted material. 
In another attempt to isolate the specific components, an affinity column was prepared using 
absorbed anti-B. jararaca IgG coupled to Sepharose-CL-4B. B. jararaca venom was 
applied to the column and the bound venom antigens were eluted by 0.1 M Glycine-HCI, 
pH 2.5. The eluate was tested for the presence of the specific components by immunoblot. 
The absorbed antivenom stained 4 venom components. One of them stained very lightly is a 
band with approximate molecular weight of 22 kDa which also stained specifically stained 
by the same absorbed antivenom on the whole venom Fig. 3.39 (B). Therefore this venom 
component could probably be an specific component of the B. jararaca venom The 
homologous non-absorbed antivenom stained also this band and with more intensity than 
the absorbed antivenom Only the non-absorbed anti-B. atrox stained lightly a band with the 
same molecular weight. The other heterologous non-absorbed antivenoms showed reactivity 
with other B. jararaca venom components affinity isolated. The non-absorbed anti-B. 
neuwiedi shows very little reaction with only one of the venom components. The 
homologous absorbed and non-absorbed antivenom and the heterologous non-absorbed 
antivenoms stained also a venom band of approximate molecular weight of 50 kDa. This 
venom band was also stained by the absorbed antivenom on the B. jararaca venom Fig. 
3.39 (B). The results suggest that specific venom component(s) might be present in minute 
amounts in the B. jararaca venom. Also that they can share the same molecular weight of 
non-specific components. The use of absorbed antivenom with higher degrees of species-
specificity (this could possibly be achieved by increasing the number of absorption steps) for 
the preparation of the affinity column, could probably ensure the isolation of only the 
species-specific components from the venom. However the results obtained in this study 
seem to indicate that an specific venom marker (approx. 22 kDa) for the B. jararaca venom 
could have been identified and partially purified. 
4. 1. 1. General Discussion 
Snake venom research can be loosely divided into three main areas. The first is a basic 
research area where snake venoms are studied for their composition, properties, and how 
the components are characterised and sometimes used as tools for further research. The 
second area is that of applied research where snake venom components are studied in order 
to be used for the prevention or treatment of diseases. The third area could be named as 
clinical research, which deals with the treatment of snake bites and related areas such as 
epidemiology of snakebites. This is not a proposition for a classification for snake venom 
research but it is being used here to put into perspective the work carried out, that was 
mainly concerned in solving problems found in the area of clinical research as described 
above. 
The problems facing a physician having to treat a snake bite patient have not changed much 
since the early 1900's. As shown in the Introduction, it is necessary first to confirm the 
existence of a snakebite, then of envenoming, and the most important, to identify the venom 
causing the symptoms. Finally he must take the necessary measures for an efficient 
treatment. The most important of the above problems, is the specific and safe identification 
of the venom, followed by the treatment to be adopted. If this is the use of antivenom, then 
at which dose? Present serum therapy is empirically determined, and so little guidance can be 
given [Cardoso, 1990; Warrell, 1992]. 
Many methods have been tried to achieve this goal but none had yet succeeded. The 
advantages to be gained are obvious and some of the most clearly defined are as follows. It 
would allow the development of specific treatment measures for each species, even 
accounting for the geographical variations. It would make it possible to construct a clinical 
picture of the envenoming caused by the different species of snakes; allow the production of 
species-specific antivenoms or regional specific antivenoms. Epidemiological studies would 
be more accurate and allow for the development of preventive and treatment measures 
concerning a country or a specific geographical region. Antivenom therapy could be 
monitored and the right doses defined for each snake species. 
This work is concerned primarily in generating species-specific antivenoms and identifying 
species-specific "marker" components for some of the Brazilian Bothropic venoms. The 
study creates the possibility of using these reagents for the specific detection of the snake 
venoms. 
One of the problems for the production of antivenoms, especially where there is a great 
number of different species of snakes sharing a large geographical area, is venom variability. 
These are due to the number of species, to geographical and individual variability as well as 
seasonal variability of the venoms (WHO, 1981). Although cross-specific neutralisation has 
been shown for the Bothropic venoms [Silles-Villarroel, et al., 1978/79], venom variability 
raises questions as to the composition of the venoms to be mixed or to be individually used 
to immunise the anirna1s and in the case of polyvalent antivenom it also raises the question 
of appropriate proportions [Dias da Silva, et al., 1989; Moura da Silva, et al., 1990]. 
Studies [Mandelbaum and Assakura, 1988] demonstrated a relationship between 
immunological characteristics and biological activity when they reported on the cross-
neutralisation of two haemmorrhagic factors isolated from B. jararaca, and one from the 
venom of B. neuwiedi that had been shown to cross-react in the immunodifusion method. 
Dias da Silva et al., [1989], using immunological, immunochemical and biological assays, 
reported an extensive cross-reaction between the Bothropic venoms studied by ELISA and 
immunodifusion methods. They also confirmed the cross-specific neutralisation of the 
monovalent anti-Bothropic anti-venoms. Based on their results the authors suggested that 
the venoms of B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, B. alternatus, B. moojeni and B. neuwiedi, 
should be in the immunising "venom pool" used for the production of the polyvalent 
antibothropic antivenom produced in Brazil. Moura da Silva et al., [1990], studying the 
cross-reactivities of Bothropic venoms, reported that when the venoms of B. alternatus, B. 
atrox and of B. cotiara were used as antigens in immunoblot studies and were stained by 
specific and non-specific monovalent antibothropic sera they behaved similarly. The same 
similarity of behaviour was found between the venoms of B. jararacussu, B. neuwiedi and 
B. pradoi to the venom of B. moojeni. Further the authors demonstrated that the B. 
moojeni venom shared epitopes with venom components of BJararaca. They also 
demonstrated that the anti-B. moojeni could neutralise the lethal activity of the B. jararaca 
as efficiently as the specific antivenom. Leite, et al., [1992] reported on the characterisation 
of seven Bothropic venoms by their biological activities, (caseinolytic, myotoxic, coagulant 
and haemorrhagic). They observed that only a few venoms would represent the activity 
present in venoms from the different species of snake: B. jararaca, B. jararacussu and B. 
atrox could cover for caseinolytic activity in any of the species; B. jararacussu, B. moojeni 
or B. neuwiedi would cover for myotoxic activity; B. moojeni and B. jararaca may cover 
for coagulant activity and B. jararaca, B. jararacussu and B. neuwiedi would cover for 
haemorrhagic activity. They observed that in considering the active protein distribution, the 
venoms of B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, B. moojeni, B. neuwiedi and B. atrox contain all the 
active protein determined in any of the species studied by them and that this group of 
venoms is very similar to the one suggested by Dias da Silva et al., [1989] which consisted 
of B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, B. alternatus, B. moojeni and B. neuwiedi. Our 
crossreactivity index, derived form the ELISA-inhibition studies suggests that the venoms 
of B. atrox, B. jararaca, B. neuwiedi, B. moojeni and B. cotiara, are likely candidates for 
the composition of the "venom pool" due to their reactivity. In the three studies the 
suggested composition is very similar indicating that there could be a relationship between 
the immunological characteristics of snake venom and some of their biological activities. 
The polyvalent antibothropic antivenoms in Brazil are produced by the immunisation of 
horses with a "venom pool" with fixed proportions based on the incidence of snakebites. In 
the Fundayao Ezequiel Dias (FUNED), this pool is composed of 50% of B. jararaca venom 
and 12.5% each of the following venoms; B. jararacussu, B. alternatus, B. atrox or B. 
moojeni and B. neuwiedi. [Domingues, et al., 1990a], studying the inhibition of the 
haemorrhagic activity of B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, B. alternatus, B. moojeni and B. 
neuwiedi, by the anti-Bothropic antivenom from FUNED, report the lowest inhibiting 
potency against the venom of B. jararaca. The authors conclude that the criteria used to 
determine the composition of the "venom pool" should be revised. The same authors 
[Domingues et aI., 1990b] also demonstrated that the antivenom anti-Bothropic-Lachetic 
from FUNED produced, from a "venom pool" consisting of 50% B. atrox and 50% L. 
mula, was two times more potent in inhibiting up to 100% the haemorrhagic activity of the 
reference venom which consists of B. jararaca only. These two results taken together 
confirm the need for a proportional composition of the "venom pool". Our reactivity index 
derived from the inhibition assays provided an additional information; that is the possibility 
of detennining a proportion for each venom to be included in the "venom pool" by their 
relative reactivities. 
The value of venom as taxonomic criteria have been considered by many authors, 
[Gonyalves and Vieira, 1950; Jimenez-Porras 1964]. Some authors disputed this, arguing 
that venom properties are not reliable for the differentiation and classification of snake 
species because of the extensive variation in venom composition due to geographica~ 
individua~ seasonal and other factors [Minton 1967; Minton and Weinstein. 1986; 
Schenberg, 1963]. Others studies, however, have shown that biochemical differences in 
venom properties could be used for the differentiation and classification of snake species 
[Glenn, and Straight., 1977; Jimenez-Porras 1967; Mendoza, et aI., 1992; Tan, and 
PonnuduraL 1992b; Tu, et ai., 1965]. Recently Tan, and PonnuduraL [1992a], in a large 
study involving more than 300 snakes from different species, genera and families, report 
that the biochemical characterisation of snake venoms can be used to differentiate and 
classify snake species. In our study differences between the species studied was observed in 
the PAGE assays, the IEP assays, 2D-IEP and immunoblot assays. The 2D-IEP assay 
venom patterns was strikingly different for all the species studied, making venom 
identification possible. The results of the 2D-IEP assay for the individual venoms of B. 
jararacussu indicate a constant pattern even though some individual variations are 
observed. Nevertheless, the identification of the venom is possible by comparison with the 
venom pool used as a control. When analysing the immunoblot results of the individual 
venoms assayed by their specific unabsorbed antivenom, again it is possible to identify the 
species of snake, even though individual variation can be visualised. 
The specific detection of closely related species has been pursued by many authors, with 
little or no success [Menez, 1991; Minton, 1987; Theakston, 1989b]. The high cross-
reactivity of the venoms and poor specificity of the antivenoms were the main identified 
causes offailure. The attempts to develop an ELISA for the specific detection ofBothropic 
venoms was never successful. Barral-Neto, et ai., [1990], studying the development of an 
ELISA for the Bothrops jararaca venom reported a complete non-specificity of the assay 
with the venom of B. atrox being recognised more strongly by the specific anti-B. jararaca 
then the B. jararaca venom itself The results of our study clearly shows that the specific 
identification ofBothropic venoms has been achieved in a reliable manner as well as that of 
L. muta. The specific detection of Bothropic venoms in human serum indicates that it is 
possible to apply the methods here used in the clinical diagnosis of snakebite. The results 
show that the method here developed is specific and sensitive and also reliable as it can be 
repeated with ease. The absorption of monovalent antivenoms has produced a reliable 
method of generating species-specific antibodies. 
The identification of species-specific venom "markers" is seen as the answer to the problems 
of non-specificity for the specific assaying of snake venoms, "Overlaps in venom 
components occur with regularity among species, making the consistent isolation of a 
species-specific "marker" component difficult. Thus, until more precise definitions of venom 
"fingerprints" are developed, immunodiagnostic techniques will maintain degrees of non-
specificity" [Kunkel, 1987]. 
Intraspecific venom variability for Bothropic venoms was shown [Schenberg, 1963] for the 
venoms of B. neuwiedi. Five venom variants were shown to exist by the gel immunodifusion 
method, and some subspecies would have venoms from more than one variant. No 
subspecies studied contained venom from all variants. Moura da Silva et aI., [1990], using 
immunoblot assays, failed to detect any venom components specifically stained by their 
homologous antivenom Our results show the identification of species-specific venom 
components for B. jararaca, B. jararacussu, B. alternatus, B. moojeni, B. neuwiedi and L. 
muta and probably those of B. atrox and B. cotiara venom In the studies with the 
individual venoms all presented the specific components, although differences in their 
amounts can be observed. The result for the B. alternatus venom is interesting because of 
the number of species-specific components visualised. It differs from the other venoms 
where only one or two species-specific components were observed. Some of the B. 
alternatus species-specific components could also carry regional specificity characteristics 
and it should be investigated further with individual venoms from different geographical 
regions. As the B. alternatus species has no record of subspecies, these proposed studies 
could bring additional information on the classification of the species. The results for the B. 
neUWiedi venom obtained here, and those of Schenberg, [1963], are not readily comparable. 
He used a polyc1onal antisera which was produced against the venoms of B. jararaca, B. 
jararacussu, B. alternatus and B. atrox. Thus, the antivenom could not have detected 
species-specific components since it had not been raised against the B. neuwiedi venom, but 
it was capable of detecting the existence of differences in the venom content of the different 
subspecies which, cross-reacted differently with the polyc1onal antivenom In our studies we 
absorbed the specific monovalent antivenoms with their heterologous venoms leaving only 
the antibodies reacting against venom components specific for the species. All the B. 
neuwiedi venoms from different geographical regions tested contained the specific 
components. This was the case also with the venoms of B. jararacussu and B. moojeni. 
The results achieved here have for the first time shown the existence of species-specific 
snake venom components. Also it was the first time that a species-specific ELISA was 
developed for the Bothropic venoms. The immunoblot assays with the individual venoms 
demonstrate that they are a conserved component of these species. 
4. 1.2. Conclusion and Future work 
We believe that the results obtained in this study are of fundamental importance to the area 
of snake venom research. They should assist in the fhlfi1ment of most of the unachieved 
goals in this field of research, concerning the better understanding of snakebite 
envenomation past and present and the production of more efficient specific antivenoms and 
the characterisation of the venom's biological and immunological activities. 
The future work should consist in the isolation of these components for their further 
physicochemical, biological and immunological characterisation. 
We need to continue with the identification of specific components of other snake species 
and also study the venoms of specimens present in islands like the B. insulares as well as 
other snakes that would have evolved in parallel with the mainland snakes. Also from 
species on the mainland separated by natural barriers. 
We need to proceed with work to develop a diagnostic kit for snakebites of Brazilian 
Bothropic snakes suitable for field use. 
We need to develop an assay for the epidemiological study of past envenomation and use 
their detection in human serum for the study of antivenom therapy. 
Above all at this stage we need to produce monoclonal antibodies to the specific 
components for use in physicochemical characterisation studies, biological activities of 
venom components and for use in the diagnostic test. 
The amino acid sequence of purified components can be determined and used for the study 
of the systematic evolution of snake species. The study may answer more fundamental 
questions like why these components are responsible for carrying the species-specificity. 
5. BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Amara~ C. F. S., Dourado, H. v., Koyuoumdjian, 1. A., Cardoso, 1. L. C., de Campos, 1. 
A., de Azevedo Marques, M. M. and Lopes, P. F. A. Manual de Diagn6stico e Tratamento 
de Acidentes Ofidicos. 1 ed., Vol. 1. Brasilia: Ministerio da Saude, 1991. 
Angeletti, H. R A. and Bradshaw, R A. Nerve growth factors in snake venoms. In Snake 
Venoms, ed. C. Y. Lee. 276-294. 52. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1979. 
Assakura, M. T.,Furtado, M. F. and Mandelbaum, F. R. Biochemical and biological 
differentiation of the venoms of the Lancehead vipers (Bothrops atrox, Bothrops asper, 
Bothrops marajoensis and Bothrops moojeni). Compo Biochem. Physiol. 102D (1992): 
727-732. 
Assakura, M. T., Reic~ A. P. and Mandelbaum, F. R. Comparison of immunologica~ 
biochemical and biophysical properties of three hemorrhagic factors isolated from the 
venom ofBothropsjararaca (Jararaca). Toxicon 24 (1986): 943-946. 
Avarameas, S. Coupling of enzymes to proteins with glutaraldehyde. Use of the conjugates 
for the detection of antigens and antibodies. Immunochemistry 6 (1969): 43-52. 
Axelsen, N. H. Handbook of Immunoprecipitation-in-Gel Techniques. Scandinavian 
Journal of Immunology 17 (1983): 
BanneIjee, R. N., Sahni, A. L. and Chacko, K A. Neostigmine in the treatment of elapid 
bites. Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 20 (1972): 502-509. 
Barral-Neto, M., Schriefer, A.,Vinhas, V. and Almeida, A. R. Enzyme-linked immunoassay 
for the detection ofBothropsjararaca venom. Toxicon 28 (1990): 1053-1061. 
Basu, A. S., Parker, R. and O'Connor, R. Disc electrophoresis of glycoproteins in snake 
venoms. Toxicon 8 (1970): 279-284. 
Bieber, A. L. Metal and nonprotein constituents in snake venoms. In Snake Venoms, ed. C. 
Y. Lee. 295-308. 52. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1979. 
Boquet, P. Immunological properties of snake venoms. In Snake Venoms, ed. C. Y. Lee. 
751-800. 52. Springer-Verlag,: Springer-Verlag, 1979. 
Boulain, 1. C., Menez, A., Couderc, 1., Jaure, G., Liacopoulos, P. and Fromageot, P. 
Neutralizing monoclonal antibody specific for Naja nigricolis toxin a: Preparation, 
characterization and localization of the antigenic binding site. Biochemistry 21 (1982): 
2910-2915. 
Boyden, T. W. Snake venom poisoning: diagnosis and treatment. Arizona Medicine 37 
(1980): 639-641. 
Bragan9a, B. M. and Patel, N. T. Glycoproteins as components of the lethal factors in cobra 
venom (Naja naja). Can.J. Biochem. 43 (1965): 915-921. 
Brazil, V. Contribui9ao ao estudo de veneno ophidico. m. Tratamentos das mordeduras das 
cobras. Rev. med Sao Paulo 4 (1901): 375-380. 
Brown, G. and Ling, N. R Murine monoclonal antibodies. In Antibodies: a praticai 
approach, ed. D. Catty. 81-104. 1. Oxford: IRL Press, 1989. 
Burgess, I L. and Dart, R C. Snake venom coagulopathy: Use and abuse of blood 
products in the treatment of pit viper envenomation. Annals of Emergency Medicine 20 
(1991): 795-801. 
Calmette, A. Proprietes du serum des animaux immunises contre Ie venin des serpentes, et 
therapeutique de l'envenimation. C. R. Acad Sci. 118 (1894): 720-722. 
Campbe11, C. H. Symptomatology, Pathology, and Treatment of the Bites of Elapid Snakes. 
In Snake Venoms, ed. C.Y. Lee. 898-921. 52. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer-
Verlag, 1979. 
Cardoso, I L. C. Bothropic accidents. Mem. Inst. Butantan 52 (1990): 43-44. 
Cardoso, I L. C. and Brando, R B. Acidentes por animais per;onhentos: Clinica e 
tratamento. Sao Paulo: Livraria e Editora Santos, 1982. 
Carrol, S. B., Thalley, B. S., Theakston, R D. G. and Laing, G. Comparison of the purity 
and efficacy of affinity purified aviar antivenoms with commercial equine crotalid 
antivenoms. Toxicon 30 (1992): 1017-1025. 
Castro, S. C. B., Sano-Martins, I. S.,Kamiguti, A. S., Bouabci, S. A. and Nagamachi, A. M. 
Compara9ao entre tratamentos do acidente botr6pico com diferentes doses de antiveneno. 
Mem. Inst. Butantan 52 (1990): 76. 
Catty, D. and Raykundalia, C. Gel immunodiffusion, immunoelectrophoresis and 
immunostaining methods. In Antibodies: a practical approach, ed. D. Catty. 462. 1 ed., 
Vol. 1. Oxford: IRL Press, 1988. 
Chandler, H. M. and Hurre11, G. R A new enzyme immunoassay system suitable for field 
use and its application in a snake venom detection kit. Clin. Chimica Acta 121 (1982): 225-
Cbippaux, I-P., Williams, V. and White, I Review article-Snake venom variability: 
methods of study, results, results and interpretation. Toxicon 29 (1991): 1279-1303. 
Cbippaux, 1. P. and Goyffon, M. Principles and indications of antivenom serotherapy. 
Toxicon 30 (1992): 498. 
Christensen, P. A. Production and Standardization of Antivenin. In Snake Venoms, ed. C. 
Y. Lee. 825-846. 52. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1979. 
Cohen, W. R,Wetzel, W. and Kadish, A. Local heat and cold application after eastern 
cottonmouth moccasin (Agkistrodon piscivorous) envenomation in the rat: effect on tissue 
injury. Toxicon 30 (1992): 1383-1386. 
Coulter, A. R, Harris, R. D., Sutherland, S. K Enzyme immunoassay for the rapid clinical 
identification of snake venom The Medical Journal of Australia 3 (1980): 433-435. 
Coulter, A. R, Cox, 1. C., Sutherland, S. K and Waddell, C. 1. A new solid-phase sandwich 
radioimmunoassay and its application to the detection of snake venom Journal of 
Immunological Methods 23 (1978): 241-252. 
Coulter, A. R, Sutherland, S. K and Broad, A. 1. Assay of Snake Venoms in Tissue Fluids. 
Journal of ImmunolOgical Methods 4 (1974): 297-300. 
Cox, 1. C., Moisidis, A. V., Shepherd,1. M.,Drane, D. P. and Jones, S. A novel format for a 
rapid sandwich EIA and its application to the identification of snake venoms. Journal of 
Immunological Methods 146 (1992): 213-218. 
Currie, B., Hudson, B. and Vince, 1. Snake bite and snake identification [Letter]. 
Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 82 (1988): 655. 
Daniel, 1. P., Heneine, L. G. D., Tavares, C. A. P., Nascimento, M. C. S. and Heneine, I. F. 
Generation of protective immune sera by Crotalus dirissus terrificus venom detoxified by 
controlled iodination. Brazilian J. Med BioI. Res. 20 (1987): 713-720. 
Devi, A. The protein and nonprotein constituents of snake venoms. In Venomous Animals 
and their Venoms, ed. W. Bucherl, E. Buckley, and V. Deulofeu. 119. l. New York: 
Academic Press, 1968. 
Dias da Silva, W., Fan, H. W., Fran~a, F. O. S., Cardoso, 1. L. C., Warrell, D. A., 
Theakston, R D. G. and BIASG. Early reactions due injection of horse antivenoms in 
victims ofBothrops snake bites in Brazil. Toxicon 31 (1993): 122-123. 
Dias da Silva, W., Guidolin, R, Raw, I., Higashi, H. G., Morais, I. F., Lima, M. R S. R, 
Yamaguchi, I. K, Nishikawa, A. K, Stehphan, A. M., Marcelino, 1. R, et a. Cross-
reactivity of Horse monovalent antivenoms to venoms of ten Bothrops species. Mem. Inst. 
Butantan 51 (1989): 153-168. 
DoeI)', H. M. Additional purine compounds ill the venom of tiger snake (Notechis 
scutatus). Nature 180 (1957): 799-800. 
Domingues, L. C. T., Diniz, C. R. and Ferreira-Alves, D. L. Neutralizaftao da atividade 
hemorragica de venenos botr6picos (I). Men. Inst. Butantan 52 (1990a): 75-76. 
Domingues, L. C. T., Diniz, C. R. and Ferreira-Alves, D.L. Neutralizaftao da atividade 
hemorragica de venenos botr6picos (IT). Mem. Inst. Butantan 52 (1990b): 76. 
Duke, J. A. Handbook o/Medicinal Herbs. Los Altos, CA: Lange MedicaL 1985. 
Dwivedi, S., Sheshadri, S. and D'Souza, C. Time limit for anti-snake venom administration 
[Letter]. The Lancet 9 (1989): 622. 
Eaker, D. Isolation of neurotoxin in case of a fatal cobra bite. Journal 0/ Forensic Medicine 
16 (1969): 96-99. 
Eapen, C. K, Chandy, N., Kochuvarkey, K L., Zacharia, P. K and Thomas, P. J. Unusual 
complication of snake bite: hypopituitarism after viper bites. In Animal, plant and microbial 
toxins, ed. Oshaka et a1. 467-473. 2. New York: Plenum, 1976. 
Engelmann, W.-E. Snakes. 1 ed., Translated by Sylvia Furness. Beckenham: Croom Helm 
Ltd, 1984. 
Fairley, N. H. Criteria for detennining the efficacy of ligature ill snake bite (the 
subcutaneous-intravenous index.). Med J Aust. 1 (1929): 377-394. 
Faure, G. and Bon, C. Several isoforms of crotoxin are present in individual venoms from 
the South American rattlesnake, Crotalus durissus terrificus. Toxicon 25 (1987): 229-234. 
Fernandes, I., Takehara, H. A. and Mota, I. Isolation of Ig~ from hyperimmune horse 
anti-snake venom serum: its protective ability. Toxicon 29 (1991): 1373-1379. 
Ferreira, L. A. F., Henriques, O. B., Lebrun, I.,Batista, M. C. B., Prezoto, B. C., Andreoni, 
A. S. S., Zelnik, R. and HabermehL G. A new bradykinin-potentianting peptide (peptide P) 
isolated from the venom of Bothrops jararacussu Gararacuftu tapete, urutu dourado). 
Toxicon 30 (1992): 33-40. 
Ferreira, S. H. A bradykinin-potentiating factor (BPF) present in the venom of Bothrops 
jararaca. British Journal o/Pharmacology 24 (1965): 163-169. 
Ferreira, S. H., Bartlet, D. C. and Greene, L. J. Isolation of bradykinin-potentiating peptides 
from Bothropsjararaca venom Biochemistry 9 (1970): 2583-2592. 
Flowers, H. H. Active Immunization of a Human Being against Cobra (Naja naja) Venom 
Nature 200 (1963): 1017-1018. 
Fraser, T. R. The treatment of snake poisoning with antivenene derived from animals 
protected against serpent's venom. Brit. med J II (1895): 416-419. 
Freitas, M. A.,Geno, P. W., Sumner, L. W., Collke, M. E., Hudiburg, S. A., Ownby, C. 
L.,Kaiser, I. I. and Odell, G. V. Citrate is a major component of snake venoms. Toxicon 30 
(1992): 461-464. 
Freitas, T. V., Tavares, A. P., Theakston, R. D. G., Laing, G. and New, R. R. C. Use of 
liposomes for protective immunisation against Crotalus durissus (Tropical rattlesnake) 
venom. Toxicon 27 (1989): 341-347. 
Friederich, C. and Tu, A. T. Role of metals in snake venoms for hemorrhagic, esterase, and 
proteolytic actvities. Biochem. Pharmacol. 20 (1971): 1549-1556. 
Galfre, G., Milstein, C. Preparation of monoclonal antibodies: strategies and procedures. 
Meth. Enzymol. 73 (1981): 1-46. 
Ganguly, S. N. and Malkana, M. T. Indian snake venoms. II. Cobra venom: its chemical 
composition, protein fractions and their physiological actions. 1nd. J. med Res. 24 (1936): 
281-286. 
Gartner, T. K, Stocker, K and Williams, D. C. Thrombolectin: a lectin isolated from 
Bothrops atroxvenom. FEBS Lett. 117 (1980): 13-16. 
George, A., Tharakan, V. T. and Solez, K Viper bite poisoning in India: a review with 
special reference to renal complications. Renal Failure 10 (1987): 91-99. 
Gill, K A. The evaluation of cryotherapy in the treatment of snake envenomation. South. 
Med J. 63 (1970): 552-556. 
Glass, T. G. Early debridement in pit viper bites. Journal of the American Medical 
Association 235 (1976): 2513-2516. 
Glenn, 1. L. and Straight, R. C. The midget faded rattlesnake (Crotalus viridis concolor), 
venom: lethal toxicity and individual variability. Toxicon 15 (1977): 129-133. 
Gon~alves, 1. M. and Vieira., L. G. Estudos sobre venenos de serpentes brasileiras. An. da 
Acad Brasileira de Ciencia 22 (1950): 141-149. 
Grabar, P. and Williams, C. A. Methode permettant l'etude conjugue des proprietes 
electrophoretiques et immunochimiques d'un melange de proteines. Biochim. hiophys Acta 
10 (1953): 193. 
Greenwood, F. C., Hunter, M. W. and Glover, 1. S. The preparation of 131 I-labelled human 
growth hormone of high specific radioactivity. Biochem. J. 89 (1963): 114-123. 
Greenwood, M., Warrell, D. A., Davidson, N. Mcd., Ormerod, L. D., Reid, H. A. 
Immunodiagnosis of snake bite. British Medical Journal 4 (1974): 743-745. 
Grognet, 1.-M., Gatineau, E., Bougis, P., HaNey, A. L., Couderc, 1., Fromageot, P. and 
Menez, A. Two neutralizing monoclonal antibodies specific for Naja nigricollis cardiotoxin: 
preparation, characterization and localization of the epitopes. Molecular Immunology 23 
(1986): 1329-1337. 
Haast, W. E. and Winer, M. L. Complete and spontaneous recovery from the bite of a blue 
krait (Bungarus caeruleus). Amer. J. Trop. Med Hyg. 4 (1955): 1135-1137. 
Harlow, E. and Lane, D. Antibodies: a laboratory manual. 1 ed., Cold Spring Harbor: Cold 
Spring Harbor, 1988. 
Hames, B. D. and Rickwood, D. Gel Electrophoresis of Proteins: A Practical Approach. 2 
ed., Practical Approach, ed. B. D. Hames and D. Rickwood. Oxford: IRL Press, 1990. 
Harris, 1. B. Snake venoms in science and clinical medicine. 3 . Neuropharmacological 
aspects of the acitivity of snake venoms. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical 
Medicine and Hygiene 83 (1989): 745-747. 
Hawgood, B. 1. Review article-Pioneers of anti-venomous serotherapy: Dr Vital Brazil 
(1865-1950). Toxicon 30 (1992): 573-579. 
Heneine, I. F., Heneine, L. G. D., Daniel, 1. P., Nascimento, M. C. S. and Rocha, o. A. 
Properties of Protein Toxins and Venoms Detoxified by Controlled Iodination. Anais da 
Academia de Ciencias do Estado de Sao Paulo. 57-IT (1988): 55-66. 
Hirakawa, Y. Venom of Trimeresurus elegans and Trimereusrus jlavoviridis. Daigaku 
Igaku Zasshi 26 (1974): 611. 
Ho, M., Warre11, D. A., Looareesuwan, S., Phillips, R. E. Chanthavanich, P., Karbwang, J., 
Supanamond, W., Viravan, C., Hutton, R. A and Vejcho, S. Clinical Significance of venom 
antigen levels in patients envenomed by the Malayan pit viper (Calloselasma rhodostoma). 
Am. J. trop. Med Hyg. 35 (1986): 579-587. 
Hoge, A. R. Preliminary Account on Neotropical Crotalinae [Serpentes Viperidae]. Mem. 
Inst. Butantan 32 (1965): 109-184. 
Homsi-Brandeburgo, M. I.,Queiroz, L. S., Santo-Neto, H., Rodrigues-Simioni, L. and 
Giglio, 1. R. Fractionation of Bothrops jararacussu snake venom:partial chemical 
characterization and biological activity ofbothropstoxin. Toxicon 26 (1988): 615-627. 
Hurre11, G. R. and Chandler, H. W. Cappilary enzyme assay field kits for detection of snake 
venom in clinical specimens. The Med Journal of Australia 2 (1982): 236-237. 
Iddon, D., Hommel, M. and Theakston, R. D. G. Characterization ofa monoclonal antibody 
capable of neutra1izing the haemorrhagic activity of West African Echis carinatus (carpet 
viper) venom. Toxicon 26 (1988): 167-179. 
Inamasu, Y., Nakano, K, Kobayashi, M., Samesbima, Y. and Obo, F. On the nature of the 
prosthetic group of the L-amino acid oxidase form habu snake (Trimeresurus jlavoviridis) 
venom. Acta Med Univ. Kagoshima 16 (1974): 23. 
Iwanaga, S. and Suzuki, T. Enzymes in snake venom. In Snake venoms, ed. Chen-Yuan 
Lee. 61-158. 1 ed., Vol. 52. Springer-Verlag, 1979. 
Jamieson, R. and Peam, J. An epidemiological and clinical study of snake-bites ill 
childhood. The Medical Journal of Australia 150 (1989): 693-695. 
Jimenez-Porras, J. M. Differentiation between Bothrops nummifera and Bothrops picadoi 
by means of the biochemical properties of their venoms. In Animal TOXins, ed. F. E. Russell 
and P. R. Saunders. 307-321. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1967. 
Jimenez-Porras, J. M. Intraspecific variations in composition of venom of the jumping viper, 
Bothrops nummifera. Toxicon 2 (1964): 187-195. 
Jorge, T. M. and Ribeiro, L. A. Distancia entre os ferimentos causados pelas presas e 
tamanbo da serpente. In XXIII Congresso de Sociedade Brasileira de Medicina Tropical e 
IV Congresso da Sociedade Brasileira de Infectologia in Pontijica Universidade Catolica 
do Parana - Curitiba, , 55-56, Year. 
Joseph-Ryan, S. R. N. Venomous snakebites. Nursing Mirror 8 (1983): 24-26. 
Kabara, J. J. and Fischer, G. H. Chemical composition of Naja naja Extractable lipids. 
Toxicon 7 (1969): 223-227. 
Kaiser, E. and Michl, H. Die Biochemie der tierischen Gifte. F. Deuticke, Vienna: 1958. 
Kamigut~ A. S., Cardoso, J. L. C., Theakston, R. D. G., Sano-Martins, I. S., Hutton, R. A 
Rugman, F. P., Warrell, D. A. and Hay, C. R. M. Coagulopathy and haemorrhage in human 
victims ofBothropsjararaca envenoming in Brazil. Toxicon 29 (1991): 961-972. 
Karlsson, E. Chemistry of Protein Toxins in Snake Venoms. In Snake Venoms, ed. C.Y. 
Lee. 159-212. 1 ed., Vol. 52. Berlin: Spring-Verlag, 1979. 
Kat 0 , H., Iwanaga, S. and Suzuki, T. The isolation and amino acid sequences of new 
pyroglutamyl peptides from snake venoms. Experientia 22 (1966): 49-50. 
Kaufinann, M. Du Venin de la Vipere. Paris: Masson, 1889. 
Kouyoumdjian, J. A. Intracranial haemorrhage after snake bite. Mem. Inst. Butantan 52 
(1990): 45-46. 
Kouyoumdjian, J. A. and Polize~ C. Acidentes ofidicos causados por Bothrops moojeni: 
relato de 37 casos. Rev. Inst. Medtrop. Sao Paulo 30 (1988): 424-432. 
KrolL 1. Production of specific antisera by immunization with preciptin lines. Methods in 
Enzymology 73 - Part B (1981): 53-57. 
Kumar, V.,Rejent, T. A. and Elliott, W. B. Anticholinesterase activity of elapid venoms. 
Toxicon 11 (1973): 131-138. 
Kunke1, D. Envenomations and Toxinology. Annals of Emmergency Medicine 16 (1987): 
929-931. 
Kurecki ill, B. A. and Brownlee Jr, H. 1. Venomous snakebites in the United States. The 
Journal of Family Practice 25 (1987): 386-392. 
Kurstak, E. Enzyme Immunodiagnosis. Academic Press Inc. (London), 1986. 
Labrousse, H., Nishikawa, A. K, Bon, C. and Avramaes, S. Development of a rapid and 
sensitive enzyme-Iynked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for measuring venom antigens after 
an experimental snake bite. Toxicon 26 (1988): 1157-1167. 
Laemmli, U. K Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of 
bacteriophage T4. Nature, London 227 (1970): 680-685. 
Laing, G., Theakston, R. D. G. and New, R. R. C. Use of lip 0 somes incorporating 
immunostimulant for parenteral and oral immunisation against snake venom In Progress in 
Venom and Toxin Research, ed. P. Gopalakrisnakone and C. K Tan. 283-295. Singapore: 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Singapore, 1987. 
Lamb, G. On the precipitin of cobra venom: A means of distinguishing between the proteids 
of different snake poisons. Lancet 2 (1902): 431-435. 
LaurelL C. B. Antigen-antibody crossed electrophoresis. Anal. Biochem. 10 (1965): 358-
Leite, L. C. C., Furtado, M. F. D., Correa, T. C. and Raw, I. Characterization of the snake 
venoms from seven brazilian species of Bothrops by FPLC anion-exchange 
chromatography. Compo Biochem, Physiol. 102B (1992): 512-52-. 
Leopold, R. S. and Merriam, T. W. The effectiveness of tourniquet, incision and suction in 
snake venom removal. Naval Med Field Res. Lab 10 (1960): 211-240. 
Levi-Montalcini, R. and Angeletti, P. U. Nerve growth factor. Physiol. Rev. 48 (1968): 
534-569. 
L~ Q. and Ownby, C. L. Evaluation of four different immunogens for the production of 
snake antivenoms. Toxicon 30 (1992): 1319-1330. 
Lomonte, B., Furtado, M. F., Rovira, M. E., Carmona, E., Rojas, G., Aymerich, R. and 
Gutierrez, 1. M. South American venom proteins antigenic ally related to Bothrops asper 
myotoxin. Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research 23 (1990): 427-435. 
Majeed, P. A. and Thomas, Z. Panhypopituitarism as a sequelae to snake venom poisoning: 
a report of six cases. In Abstract. Association of Physicians, India Conference in Madhura, 
Year. 
Mandelbaum, F. R. and Assakura, M. T. Antigenic relationship of hemorrhagic factors and 
proteases isolated from the venoms three species of bothrops snakes. Toxicon 26 (1988): 
379-385. 
Martz, W. Review article-Plants with a reputation against snakebite. Toxicon 30 (1992): 
1131-1142. 
Mastro, A. M., Hurley, D. 1., Winning, R. K, Filipowski, R., Ogilvie, M. L. and Gartner, T. 
K Mitogenic acitivity of snake venom lectins. Cell Tissue Kinet. 19 (1986): 557-566. 
Matthiesen, F., Schumacher, M. 1. and Lowenstein, H. An immunoelectrophoretic analysis 
of the allergens ofCynodon dactylon (Bermuda grass) pollen. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 83 
(1989): 1124-1134. 
McCullough, N. C. and Gennaro, 1. F. Evaluation of venomous snake bite in the Southern 
United States. Journal of the Florida Medical Association 49 (1963): 959. 
McCullough, N. C. and Gennaro, 1. F. Treatment of venomous snakebite in the United 
States. Clin. Toxico. 3 (1970): 483-500. 
Mcdowell, S. B. Systematics. In Snakes: Ecology and Evolution Biology, ed. R.A. Seigel, 
IT. Collins, and S.S. Novak. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1987. 
Meaume, 1. Les venins des serpents agents modificateurs de la coagulacion sangume. 
Toxicon 4 (1966): 25-58. 
Mebs, D. List of Biologically Active Components from Snake Venoms. Frankfurt: Private 
Publication, 1985. 
Mebs, D. and Doll, B. Snake venom enzymes: inhibition by commercial antivenoms. 
Toxicon 30 (1992): 534. 
Mebs, D., Sabine, P. and Von Tenspolde, W. Snake venom hemorrhagins:Neutralization by 
commercial antivenoms. Toxicon 26 (1988): 453-458. 
Meier, 1. Venomous Snakes. In Medical Use of Snake Venom Proteins, ed. K F. Stocker. 
1-32. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1990. 
Mendoza, C. E. C., Bhatt~ T. and Bhatt~ A. R. Electrophoretic analysis of snake venoms. 
Journal o/Chromatography 580 (1992): 355-363. 
Menez, A. Molecular immunology of snake toxins. Pharmac. Ther. 30 (1985): 91-113. 
Menez, A. Immunology of Snake Toxins. In Snake Toxins, ed. A. L. Harvey. 35-90. New 
York: Pergamon Press, 1991. 
Middelbrook, 1. L. Cross-neutralization of Phospholipase A2 neurotoxins from snake 
venoms. Toxicon 29 (1991): 1481-1487. 
Minton, S. Observations on toxicity and antigenic makeup of venoms from juvenile snakes. 
In Animal Toxins, ed. F. E. Russell and P. R. Saunders. 211-222. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 
1967. 
Minton, S. and Weinstein, S. A. Geographic and ontogenic variation in venom of the 
western diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox). Toxicon 24 (1986): 71-80. 
Minton, S. A. Present tests for detection of snake venom: Clinical applications. Annals 0/ 
Emmergency Medicine 16 (1987): 932-937. 
Minton, S. A. Neurotoxic Snake Envenoming. 10 (1990): 52-61. 
Misra, N. P. and Misra, S. C. Snake-bite. Quartely Medical Review 33 (1982): 1-4l. 
Mollier, P. Etude immunologique d'une neurotoxine presynaptique a acitivite 
phospholipasique: La not exine extraite du venin du serpent tigre australien Notechis 
scutatus scutatus. Universite de Paris XI, 1987. 
Moroz, C., De Vries, A. and Sela, M. Isolation and characterization of a neurotoxin from 
Vipera palestinae venom Biochim Biophys Acta 124 (1966): 136-146. 
Morris, R. and Morris, D. Men and Snakes. 1 ed., London: Hutchinson and Co. Ltd, 1965. 
Mors, W. B. Plants active against snake bite. In: Economic and Medicinal Plant Research, 
ed. H. Wagner, H. Hikino, and N. R. Farnsworth. 353-373. 5. New York: Academic Press, 
1991. 
Mors, W. B., Do Nascimento, M. C., Parente, 1. P., Da Silva, M. H., Melo, P. A. and 
Suarez-Kurtz, G. Neutralization of lethal and myotic activities of South American 
rattlesnake venom by extracts and constituents of the plant Eclipta prostata (Asteraceae). 
Toxicon 27 (1989): 1003-1009. 
Moseley, T. Coral Snakebite: recovery following symptoms of respiratory paralysis. Annals 
of Surgery 163 (1966): 943-948. 
Moura da Silva, A. M.,D'Imperio Lima, M. R.,Nishikawa, A. K,Brodskyn, C. I.,Dos 
Santos, M. C.,Furtado, M. F. D.,Dias da Silva, W. and Mota, I. Antigenic cross-reactivity 
of venoms obtained from snakes of genus Bothrops. Toxicon 28 (1990): 181-188. 
Muelling, R. 1., Samson, R. F. and Bevan, T. The precipitin test in elucidating the cause of 
death. Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 28 (1957): 489-494. 
Nakagawa, M., Nakani~ K, Darko, L. L. and Vick, 1. A. Structures of cabenegrins A-I 
and A-IT, potent anti-snake venoms. Tetrahedron Lett. 23 (1982): 3855-3858. 
Nelson, B. K Snake envenomation: Incidence, clinical presentation and management. 
Medical Toxicology 4 (1989): 17-31. 
New, R. R. C., Theakston, R. D. G., Zumbuhl, O.,Iddon, D. and Friend, 1. Immunization 
against snake venoms. The New England Journal of Medicine 311 (1984): 56-57. 
Okonogi, T., Hattori, Z., Ogiso, A. and Mitsui, S. Detoxification by persimmon tannin of 
snake venoms and bacterial toxins. Toxicon 17 (1976): 524-527. 
Ondett~ M. A., Williams, N. 1., Sabo, E. F., Pluscec, 1., Weaver, E. R. and Kocy, O. 
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors from the venom of Bothrops jararaca. Isolation, 
elucidation of structure and synthesis. Biochemistry 10 (1971): 4033-4039. 
Oshima, G. and Iwanaga, S. Occurence of glycoproteins in various snake venoms. Toxicon 
7 (1969): 235-238. 
Otten, E. 1. and McKirnrn, D. Venomous snakebite in a patient allergic to horse serum. 
Annals of Emergency Medicine 12 (1983): 624-627. 
Ownby, C. L. Locally Acting Agents: Myotoxins, Hemorrhagic Toxins and Dermonecrtic 
Factors. In Handbook of Toxinology, ed. W. Thomas Shier and Dietrich Mebs. 601-654. 
New York: Marcel Dekker Inc., 1990. 
Pawar, D. K and Singh, H. Elapid snake bite. British Journal of Anesthesia 59 (1987): 
385-387. 
Perez,1. C., Garcia, V. E. and Huang, S. Y. Production of a monoclonal antibody against 
hemorrhagic acitivity of Crotalus atrox (Western Diamondback rattlesnake) venom 
Toxicon 22 (1984): 967-973. 
Persson, H. and Irestedt, B. A Study of 136 Cases of Adder Bite Treated in Swedish 
Hospitals during One Year. Acta Med Scand 210 (1981): 433-439. 
P tt Led Glass J P. Neurolo o-i cal complications of a coral snake bite. e 19rew, . . an ,. tr 
Neurology 35 (1985): 589-592. 
Phisalix, M. M. C. and Bertrand, G. Sur la propriete anti-toxique du sang des anirnaux 
vaccines contre Ie venin de vipere. C.R Acad Sci. 118 (1894): 356-358. 
Pugh, R. N. H. and Theakston, R. D. G. A clinical study of viper bite poisoning. Annals of 
Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 81 (1987): 135-149. 
Pukrittayakamee, S., Esnout: M. P. and McMichae~ A. Purification and inactivation of the 
factor X activator of Russell's viper venom with monoclonal antibodies. Mol. BioI. Med 1 
(1983): 123-135. 
Pukrittayakamee, S., Ratcliffe, P. 1., McMichae~ A., WarreR D. A. and Bunnag, D. A 
competitive radioimmunoassay using a monoclonal antibody to detect the factor X activator 
of Russell's viper venom Toxicon 25 (1987): 721-729. 
Ratanabanangkoon, K, Billings, P. B. and Matangkasombut, P. Immunodiagnosis of snake 
venom poisoning. Asian Pacific Journal of Allergy and Immunology 5 (1987): 187-190. 
Ribeiro, L. A. Epidemiology ofophidic accidents. Mem. Inst. Butantan 52 (1990): 15-16. 
Rosenberg, P. Phospholipases. In Handbook of Toxinology, ed. w. T. Shier and Mebs. D. 
67-278. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1990. 
Rosenfeld, G. Symptomatology, pathology and treatment of snake bites in South America. 
In Venomous animals and their Venoms, ed. W Bucher~ E Buckley, and V Deulofel. 345-
384. New York: Academic Press, 1971. 
RusseR F. E. The clinical problem of crotalid snake venom poisoning. In Snake Venoms, 
ed. C. Y. Lee. 978-996. 52. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1979. 
RusseR F. E. Snake Venom Immunology: Historical and Pratical Considerations. J 
Toxicol.-Toxin Reviews 7 (1988): 1-82. 
RusseR F. E. and Lauritzen, L. Antivenins. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical 
Medicine and Hygiene 60 (1966): 797-810. 
Sano-Martins, I. S. Hematological disturbances induced by Bothrops venom Mem. [nst. 
Butantan 52 (1990): 39-40. 
Sasaki, T. Chemical studies on the venom of Formosan habu (Trimeresurus 
mucrosquamatus Cantor) ill. On the dialysable substances in the venom Yakugaku Zasshi 
80 (1960): 844. 
Sawa~ Y. and Kawamura, Y. Study of the toxoids against the venom of certain Asian 
snakes. Toxicon 7 (1969): 19-24. 
Saway, Y. Vaccination against snake bite poisoning. In Snake Venoms, ed. C.Y. Lee. 881-
897. 52. Springer-Verlag: Spring-Verlag, 1979. 
Sawa~ Y. and Kawamura, Y. Study on cobra venom toxoid. Toxicon 30 (1992): 550. 
Schenberg, S. Immunological (Ouchterlony Method) identification of intrasubspecies 
qualitative differences in snake venom composition. Toxicon 1 (1963): 67-75. 
Schottler, W. H. A. Serological analysis of venoms and antivenins. Bull. WId Hlth. Org. 12 
(1955): 877-903. 
Sewall, H. Experiments of the preventive inoculation of snake venom J. Physiol. 8 (1887): 
Sherry, D. A Quick Response to Snakebite. The Journal of Practical Nursing 35 (1985): 
19-21+52. 
Shipo~ R, Ivanov, C. P., Dimitrov, G. and Alexiev, B. V. Composition of the low 
molecular fraction of the Bulgarian Viper venom Biochem. Biophys. Acta 104 (1965): 292-
Shulov, A., Ben-Shaul, D., Rosin, R and Nitzan, M. The efficacy of suction as a method of 
treatment in snake venom poisoning. Toxicon 7 (1969): 15-18. 
Silles-Villarroel, M.,Furlanetto, R S., Rosa, R, Zelante, F. and Navas, 1. Contribuiy30 ao 
estudo imunoquimico de venenos botropicos. Mem. Inst. Butantan 38 (1974): 31-40. 
Silles-Villarroel, M., Rosa, R, Zelante, R and Furlanetto, F. R S. Padronizay30 da 
avaliay30 da potencia de antivenenos botropicos em camundongos. Mem. Inst. Butantan 
42/43 (1978/79): 325-336. 
Singer, T. P. and Deamey, E. B. L-amino acid oxidases of snake venom I. Prosthetic group 
ofL-amino acid oxidase of moccasin venom Arch. Biochem. 27 (1950): 348-363. 
Siotta, K Chemistry and biochemistry of snake venoms. Prog. Chem. Org. Nat. Prod 12 
(1955): 406-465. 
Stewart, M. E.,Greenland, S. and Hoffinan, 1. R First-aid treatment ofpoisonous snakebite: 
are currently recommended procedures justified? Annals of Emergency Medicine 10 
(1981): 331-335. 
Stiles, B. G. A Non-Radioactive Receptor Assay for Snake Venom Postsynaptic 
Neurotoxins. Toxicon 29 (1991): 503-510. 
Stocker, K F. Composition of Snake Venoms. In Medical Use of Snake Venom Proteins, 
ed. K F Stocker. 15-19. 1 ed., Vol. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1990a. 
Stocker, K S. Snake Venom Constituents Affecting Hemostasis and Fibrinolysis. In 
Medical Use of Snake Venom Proteins, ed. K S Stocker. 97-160. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 
1990b. 
Sullivan, 1. 1. B. Past, present, and future immunotherapy of snake venom poisoning. 
Annals ofEmmergency Medicine 19 (1987): 938-944. 
Sutherland, S. K Treatment of snake bite in Australia. Some obselVations and 
recomendations. The Medical Journal of Australia 1 (1975): 30-32. 
Sutherland, S. K Treatment of snake bite. Australian Family Physician 19 (1990): 21-42. 
Sutherland, S. K and Coulter, A. R. Three instructive cases of tiger snake (Notechis 
scutatus) envenomation and how a radioimmunoassay proved the diagnosis. The Medical 
Journal of Australia 6 (1977): 177-180. 
Suzuki, T. and Iwanaga, S. Bradykinin, Kallidin, and Kallikrein. In Snake Venoms, ed. E. G. 
Erdos. 193-212.25. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer-Verlag, 1970. 
Takeuchi, M. and Tanaka, Y. Purification and characterization of anti-cholinesterase factor 
from the venom of Naja naja atra. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 623 (1980): 354. 
Talpers, S. S. and Bergin, 1. 1. Snakebite: first aid and hospital management. Kansas 
Medicine 86 (1985): 155-157,167. 
Tamya, T., Lamouroux, A., Julien, 1. F., Grima, B., Mallet, 1., Fromageot, P. and Menez, 
A. Cloning and sequence analysis of the cDNA encoding a snake neurotoxin precursor. 
Biochimie 67 (1985): 185-186. 
Tan, N.-H. and Ponnudura~ G. Biochemical Characterization of snake venoms. Toxicon 30 
(1992a): 486. 
Tan, N.-H. and Ponnudura~ G. A comparative study on the electrophoretic patterns of 
snake venoms. Compo Biochem. Physiol. 102D (1992b): 103-109. 
Tan, N.-H., Yeo, K H. and Jaafar, M. I. N. Specificity of indirect and double-sandwich 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) of Malayan pit viper venom Toxicon 30 
(1992c): 556. 
Temynck, T. and Avrameas, S. Polymerization and immobilization of proteins usmg 
ethylchloroformate and glutaraldehyde. Scand. J. Immunol. 3 (1976): 29-35. 
Theakston, R. D. G. New techniques in antivenom production and active immunization 
against snake venoms. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and 
Hygiene 83 (1989a): 433-435. 
Theakston, R. D. G. Snake venoms in science and clinical medicine 2.Applied immunology 
in snake venom research. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and 
Hygiene 83 (1989b): 741-744. 
Theakston, R. D. G. Kinetics of envenoming and therapy in snakebite. Toxicon 30 (1992): 
Theakston, R. D. G., Lloyd-Jones, M. 1. and Reid, H. A. Microelisa for detecting and 
assaying snake venom and venom antibody. Lancet 2 (1977): 639-641. 
Theakston, R. D. G. and Warrell, D. A. Antivenoms: a list ofhyperimmune sera currently 
available for the treatment of envenoming by bites and stings. Toxicon 29 (1991): 1419-
1470. 
Towbin, H., Staehelin, T. and Gordon, J. Electrophoretic transfer of proteins from 
polyacrilamide gels to nitrocellulose sheets: Procedure and some applications. Proc. Natl. 
Acad Sci. USA 76 (1979): 4350-4354. 
Trethewie, E. R. Detection of snake venom in tissues. Clin. Tox. 3 (1970): 445-455. 
Tu, A. T. Venoms. Chemistry and Molecular Biology. New York-Sydney-Toronto: John 
Wiley, 1977. 
Tu, A. T. Biotoxicology of sea snake venoms. Annals of Emmergency Medicine 16 (1987): 
1023-1028. 
Tu, A. T., James, G. P. and Chua, A. Some biochemical evidence in support of the 
classification of venomous snakes. Toxicon 3 (1965): 5-8. 
Tun-Pe, S., Phillips, R. E.,Warrell, D. A.,Moore, R. A. and Swe, T. N. Acute and chronic 
pituitary failure resembling Sheehan's syndrome following bites by Russell's viper in Burma. 
Lancet 2 (1987): 763-767. 
Underwood, G. Classification and Distribution of Venomous Snakes in the World. In Snake 
Venoms, ed. Chen-Yuan Lee. 1 ed., Vol. 52. Spring-Verlag: Springer-Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg, 1979. 
Vellard, 1. Variation geogrphique du venin de Crotalus terrificus. C. R. Soc. BioI. 130 
(1939): 463-464. 
Vieira, R. J., Bucharetchi, F. and Zambrone, F. A. D. Acidente elapidico: relato de 7 
acidentes e apresenta930 de ''bloqueio farmacol6gico" com prostigmine em urn caso. In 
Congresso Brasileiro de Toxicologia, in Sao Paulo (1987) Tema Livre, 5.24. 
Wagner, C. W. and Golladay, E. S. Crotalid Envenomation in Children: Selective 
ConselVative Management. Journal of Pediatric Surgery 24 (1989): 128-131. 
Warrell, D. A. Snake venoms in science and clinical medicine 1. Russell's viper: biology, 
venom and treatment of bites. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and 
Hygiene 83 (1989): 732-740. 
Warrell, D. A. The global problem of snakebite: its prevention and treatment. Toxicon 30 
(1992): 486. 
Warrell, D. A., Looareesuwan, S., White, N. 1. and Theakston, R. D. G. Severe neurotoxic 
envenoming by the Malayan krait Bungarus candid us (Linnaeus ):response to antivenom and 
anticholinesterase. British Medical Journal 286 (1983): 1235-1247. 
Watt, G.,Theakston, R. D. G.,Hayes, C. G, Yambao, M. L. and Sangalang, R. Positive 
response to edrophonium in patients with neurotoxic envenoming by cobras. New England 
Journal of Medicine 315 (1986): 1444-1448. 
Weiner, S. Acitve Immunization of Man Against the Venom of the Australian Tiger Snake 
(Notechis scutatus). American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 9 (1961): 284-
Weinstein, S. A., Minton, S. A. and Wilde, C. E. The distribution among ophidian venoms 
of a toxin isolated from the venom of the Mojave Rattlesnake (Crotalus scutulatus 
scutulatus). Toxicon 23 (1985): 825-844. 
Weiser, E., Wollberg, Z., Kochva, E. and Lee, S. Y. Cadiotoxic effects of the venom of the 
burrowing asp, Atractaspis engaddensis (Atractaspididae, Ophidia). Toxicon 22 (1984): 
764-767. 
WHO. Progress in the characterization of venoms and standardization of antivenoms. WHO 
Offset Publication (1981): 
Wilson, M. B. and Nakane, P. K In Immunofluorescence and Related Staining Techniques, 
ed. W. Knapp, K Holubar, and G. Wick. 215. Amsterdam: ElsevierlNorth Holland, 1978. 
Worn: H. Insuficiencia hipofisaria anterior por picada de ofidio. Arquivos Brasileiros 
Endocrinologia e Metabologia 7 (1958): 25-47. 
Yadlowski, 1. M., Tu, A. T., Garriot, 1. C. and Norton, L. E. Suicide by Snake Venom 
Injection. Journal of Forensic Sciences 25 (1980): 760-764. 
Zanin, M. and Coelho, L. Uso de neostigmine em acidentes envolvendo Micrurus:descriyao 
de urn caso. In Congresso Brasileiro de Medicina Tropical in Natal, , 26, Year. 
Zeller, E. A. Enzymes of snake venoms and their biological significance. Advanc. Enzymol. 
8 (1948): 459-495. 
6. APPENDICES 
6. 1 . Appendix I 
List of venomous snakes found in the different States and Territories of Brazil, from Hogue 
and Romano Hoge, 1978/79. In the opposite page there is a map of Brazil with the 
indication of the States and Territories. 
Both'tops at'fox (Linnaeus) 
Bothrops bilineatus smaragdinus Hoge 
Bothrops brazili Hoge 
Bothrops castelnaudi castelnaudi Dumeril, Bibron et Dumeril 
Bothrops hyopro1'us Amaral 
Lachesis muta muta (Linnaeus) 
Micrurus annelatus bolivianus Roze (provavel) 
ALAGOAS 
Bothrops erythromelas Amaral 
Bothrops leucurus Wagler 
Crotalus durissus cascavella Wagler 
Lachesis muta rhombeata (Wied) 
M icrw'Us ibiboboca (Merrem) 
TERRIT()RIO DO AMAP A 
Bothrops at1'ox (Linnaeus) 
Bothrops bilineatus bilineatus (Wied) 
Bothrops brazili Hoge 
Bothrops castelnaudi castelnaudi Dumeril, Bibron et Dumeril 
CrotalWl durissus (subespecie) 
Lachesis muta muta (Linnaeus) 
Micrurus lemniscatus lemniscatWl (Linnaeus) 
Micrurus lemniscatus helleri Schmidt e Schmidt 
Micrurus surinamensis surinamensis (Cuvier) 
AMAZONAS 
Bothrops atrox (Linnaeus) 
Bothrops bilineatus smaragdinus Hoge 
Bothrops brazili Hoge 
Bothrops castelnaudi castelnaudi Dumeril, Bibron et Dumeril 
Bothrops hyoprorus Amaral 
Bothrops neuwiedi neuwiedi Wagler 
Crotalus durissus terrificus (Laurenti) 
Lachesis muta muta (Linnaeus) 
Micrurus albicinctus Amaral 
Micrurus annelatus bolivianus Roze 
Micrurus averyi (Schmidt) 
Micrurus fili/ormis /tliformis (GUnther) 
Micrurus /ili/ormis subtilis Roze 
Micrurus hemprichii hemprichii (Jan) 
Micrurus hemprichii ortoni Schmidt 
Micrurus karlchmidti Romano 
Micrurus langsdorffi langsdorffi Wagler 
Mirrurus lemniscatus helleri Schmidt et Schmidt 
Micrurus spixii spixii Wagler 
Micrurus spixii obscurus (Jan) 
Micnlrus surinamensis nattereri Schmidt 
Micrurus surinamensis surinamensis (Cuvier) 
BAHIA 
Bothrops bilineatus bilineatus (Wied) 
Bethrops erythromelas Amaral 
Bothrops jararaca (Wied) 
Bothrops jararacussu Lacerda 
Bothrops leucurus Wagler 
Bothrops neuwiedi neuwiedi Wagler 
Bothrops neuwiedi lutzi (Miranda-Ribeiro) 
Bothrops pirajai Amaral 
Bothrops pradoi (Hoge) 
Crotalus durissus cascavella Wagler 
Lachesis muta rhombeata (Wied) 
Micrurus frontalis bmsiliensis Roze 
Micrurus lemniscatWl carvalhoi Roze 
CEARA 
Bothrops erythromelas Amaral 
Bothrops neuwiedi piauhyensis Amaral 
Crotalus durissus cascavella Wagler 
Lachesis muta rhombeata (Wied) 
Jlficrurus ibiboboca (Merrem) 
Micrurus lemniscatus carvalhoi Roze 
ESPfRITO SANTO 
Both,'ops bilineatus bilineatus (Wied) 
Bothrops jararaca (Wied) 
Bothrops jararacussu Lacerda 
Bothrops neuwiedi meridionalis Muller 
Bothrops pradoi (Hoge) 
Lachesis muta rhombeata (Wied) 
Micrurus corallinus (M errem ) 
GOlAS 
Bothrops cdstelnaudi castelnaudi Dumeril, Bibron et Dumeril 
Bothrops itapetiningae (Boulenger) 
Bothrops moojeni Hoge 
Bothrops neuwiedi goyazensis Amaral 
Crotalus durissus collilineatus Amaral 
Lachesis muta muta (Linnaeus) 
Micrurus frontalis brasiliensis Roze 
Micrurus lemniscatus carvalhoi Roze , 
--00 --
MARANHAO 
Bothrops atrox (Linnaeus) 
Bothrops bilineatus bilineatus (Wied) 
Bothrops castelnaudi castelnaudi Dumeril, Bibron et Dumeril 
Bothrops erythromelas Amaral 
Bothrops moojeni Hoge 
Bothrops neuwiedi piauhyensis Amaral 
Crotalus dUNSUS cascaveUa Wagler 
Lache.is muta muta (Linnaeus) 
Micrurus ibiboboca (Merrem) 
Micrurus spixii martiusi Schmidt 
MATO GROSSO (incluindo Mato Grosso do SuI) 
Bothrops alternatus Dumeril et Dumeril 
Bothrops bilineatus smaragdinus Hoge 
Bothrops brazili Hoge 
Bothrops castelnaudi castelnaudi Dumeril, Bibron et Dumeril 
Bothrops hyoprorus Amaral 
Bothrops itapetiningae (Boulenger) 
Bothrops jararaca (Wied) 
Bothrops jararacussu Lacerda 
Bothrop8 moojeni Hoge 
Bothrops neuwiedi bolivianu8 Amaral 
Bothrops neuwiedi diporus Cope 
Bothrops neuwiedi mattogrossensis Amaral 
Crotalu8 durissus collilineatus Amaral 
Crotalus duriS8us terrificus (Laurenti) 
Lachesis muta mu.ta (Linnaeus) 
Micrurus albicinctus Amaral 
Micrurus corallinus (Merrem) 
Micrurus donosi Hoge, Cordeiro e Romano 
Micrurus frontalis frontalis (Dumeril, Bibron et Dumeril) 
Micrurus frontalis 'P1Irrhocryptus (Cope) 
Micrurus lemniscatus carvalhoi Roze 
Micrurus 8pixii martiusi Schmidt , 
MINAS GERAIS 
Bothrops alte1"1lat'us Dumeril et Dumeril 
Bothrops erythromeias Amaral 
Bothrops fonsecai Hoge et Belluomini 
Bothrops itapetiningae (Boulenger) 
Bothrops jara1"aCa (Wied) 
Bothrops jararaCltSBU Lacerda 
Bothrops neuwiedi ItrutU Lacerda 
Crotalus durissus cascavella Wagler 
Crotalus durissus ('ollilineatus Amaral 
Crotalus durissus terrificus (Laurenti) 
Lachesis muta rhombeata (Wied) 
Micrurus frontalis brasiliensis Roze 
Micrurus lemniscatlls carvalhoi Roze 
Bothrops atrox (Linnaeus) 
Bothrops brazili Hoge 
Bothrops castelnalldi Dumeril, Bibron et Dumeril 
Bothrops marajoensis Hoge 
Bothrops bilineailts bilineatlls (Wied) 
Crotalus durissus ma1"ajoensis (Uha de Maraj6) Hoge 
Crotalus durissus (subspecie) 
Lachesis muta muta (Linnaeus) 
M icrurlls collaris (Schlegel) 
Micrunls filiformis Iiliformis (Gunther) 
Micru.rus hemprichii hemprichii (Jan) 
Micrurus lemniseatus helleri Schmidt et Schmidt 
Micrurus lemniscatus lemniscatus (Linnaeus) 
Micrurus paraensis Cunha et Nascimento 
Micrurus spixii martiusi Schmidt 
Micrurus surinamensis surinamensis (Cuvier) 
PARAfBA 
Bothrops erythromelas Amaral 
Crotalus durisS1Ul cascavella Wagler 
Lachesis muta rhombeata (Wied) 
Micrurus ibiboboea (Merrem) 
~~- 4 
PARANA 
Bothrops alternatus Dumeril et Dumeril 
Bothrops co tiara (Gomes) 
Bothrops itapetiningae (Boulenger) 
Bothrops jararaca (Wied) 
Bothrops jararacussu Lacerda 
Bothrops moojeni Hoje 
Bothrops neuwiedi diporus Cope 
Bothrops neuwiedi paranaensis Amaral 
Crotalus durissus terrificus (Laurenti) 
Micrurus corallinus (Merrem) 
Micrurus decoratus (Jan) 
Micrurus frontalis altirostris (Cope) 
Micrurus frontalis frontalis (Dumeril, Bibron et Dumeril) 
Micrurus lemniscatus carvalhoi Roze 
PERNAMBUCO 
Bothrops erythromelas Amaral 
Bothrops neuwiedi piauhyjensis Amaral 
Crotalus durissus cascavella Wagler 
Lachesi muta "hombeata (Wied) 
Micrurus ibiboboca (Merrem) 
Micruru.'f lemniscatus carvalhoi Roze 
Bothrops erythromelas Amaral 
Bothrops iglesiasi Amaral 
PlAUt 
Bothrops neuwiedii piauhyensis Amaral 
Crotalus durissus cascavella Wagler 
Lachuis muta rhombeata (Wied) 
Micrurus ibiboboca (Merrem) .. \ 
RIO DE JANEIRO 
Bothrops bilineatus bilineatus (Wied) 
Bothrops fonsecai Hoge et Belluomini 
Bothrops jarQraca (Wied) 
Bothrops jararacussll Lacerda 
Bothrops neuwiedi meridionalis Muller 
Lachesis muta rhombeata (Wied) 
Micrurus corallinus (Merrem) 
M iCTUruS decoratus (Jan) 
RIO GRANDE DO NORTE 
LJothrops erythromelas Amaral 
Crotalus durissus cascavella Wagler 
Lachesis muta rhombeata (Wied) 
Micrurus ibiboboca (Merrem) 
Micrunts lemniscatus carvalhoi Roze 
RIO GRANDE DO SUL 
Bothrops alternatus Dumeril et Bibron 
Bothrops cotiara (Gomes) 
Bothrops jararaca (Wied) 
Bothrops neuwiedi pubescens (Cope) 
Crotalus durissus terrificlls (Laurenti) 
Micrurus decoratus? (Jan) 
Micrurus frontalis altirostris (Cope) 
M icruTUS frontalis pyrrlwcryptus (Cope) 
TERRIT6RIO DE ROND()NIA 
Bothrops atrox (Linnaeus) 
Bothrops bilineatus smaragdinus Hoge 
Bothrops brazili Hoge 
Bothrops castelnaudi castelnaudi Dumeril. Bibron et Dumeril 
Bothrop h1l"'''''''us Amaral 
-00 w 
Crotalus durissus terrificus (Laurenti) 
Lachesis muta muta (Linnaeus) 
Micrurus spixii martiusi Schmidt 
Micrurus Bpixii Bpixii Wagler 
TERRIT6RIO DE RORAIMA 
Bothrops atrox (Linnaeus) 
Bothrops bilineatus smaragdinus Hoge 
Bothrops castelnaudi castelnaudi Dumeril, Bibron et Dumeril 
Crotalus durissus ruruima Hoge 
Crotalus dUriS8U8 sp, 
Lachesis muta muta (Linnaeus) 
Micrurus lemniscatus helleri Roze 
Micrurus surinamensis nattereri Schmidt 
SANT A CAT ARIN A 
BOtJl1'OP8 altenlatu8 Dumeril et Dumeril 
Bothrop8 jararaca (Wied) 
Bothrops jararacusBu Lacerda 
Crotalus duri8sus terrificus (Laurenti) 
Micrurus corallinus (Merrem) 
Micrurus d ecoratu8 (J an) 
Micruru8 frontali8 frontalis (Dumeril, Bibron et Dumeril) 
Micrurus f7'ontalis altirostris (Cope) 
Micrurus frontalis baliocorynphus (Cope) 
SAO PAULO 
Both,'ops alternatus Dumeril et Dumeril 
Bothrops co tiara (Gomes) 
Bothrops fonsecai Hoge et Belluomini 
Bothrops insularis (Amaral) (Ilha de Queimada Grande) 
Bothrop8 itapetiningae (Boulenger) 
Bothrops jararaca (Wied) 
Bothrop8 jararacussu Lacerda 
Bothrops moojeni Hoge 
I , _-c-
Both rops neuwiedi pauloensis Amaral 
Bcthrops neuwiedi Ilnttu Lacerda 
Cl'Otalus dU'tissllS collilineatus Amaral 
C,'otalus dm'isns terri/iells (Laurenti) 
Mic/,/(rus c01'allinus (Merrem) 
Micrul'lls decoTatll,~ (Jan) 
Mic1'1H'US f1'ontalis altil'osf/'is (Cope) 
Jficl'Ul'US lemniscatlls cal'valhoi Roze 
Bllt It rops erythromelas Amaral 
Bot h rops leUCl/l'IIS Wagler 
SERGIPE 
Crotalus dUl'isslIS ('a,'1cavella Wagler 
Lachesis mllta 1'llOmbeata (Wied) 
Mic/'urus ibiboboca (Merrem) 
6.2. Appendix II 
6.2.1.lnstitutions and Suppliers 
6.2.1. 1. Institutions 
Funda9ao Ezequiel Dias (FUNED) 
Rua Conde Pereira Carneiro, 80 - Gameleira, 
30550-010 Belo Horizonte, MG. 
Brazil 
Instituto Butantan 
Avenida Vital Brazil, 1500 - Butantan 
05504-901 Sao Paulo, SP 
Brazil 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG) 
Av. Antonio Carlos 6627 - Pampulha 
31270-901 Belo Horizonte, MG 
Brazil 
6.2.1.2. Suppliers. 
Bench centrifuge: C.411 model. S. A. Jouan, 130 Western Road, Tring, Hertz HP23, 4BU, 
CO2 incubator: Flow Laboratories, Woodcock Hill , Harefield Road, Rickman sworth, Hertz 
WD3 1PQ, UK 
Dialysis tubing and Dialysis tubing clips: Medicell International Ltd. 239, Liverpool Road, 
London, N1, UK 
Large electrophoresis tank: Chemical Laboratory (Chemlab) Instruments Ltd. 129 
Upminster Road, Hornchurch, Essex RM11 3XJ, UK 
Electrophoresis units: Paines and Byrne Ltd. Pabyrn Laboratories, 177/179 Bilton Road, 
Perivale, Greenford, Middlesex UB6 7HG, UK 
Inverted Microscope: Olympus CK, Olympus Optical Co., 43-2 Hatagaya 2 Chome, 
Shibuya-Ku, Tokio, Japan. 
Laminar flow tissue culture hood: Flow Laboratories, Woodcock Hill, Harefield Road, 
Rickmansworth, Hertz WD3 1 PQ, UK 
Glass Agar plates (8 X 8 cm) and (5 X 3 cm) from the University of Birmingham UK 
Liquid Nitrogen containers: Cryoservices, Blackpole Trading Estate, Blackpole Road, 
Worcester WR3 8SG, UK 
Microtitration plates: Flow Laboratories, Woodcock Hill, Harefield Road Rickman sworth , , 
Hertz WD3 IPQ, UK 
Gel plate storage boxes: Sterilin Ltd., Lampton House, Lampton Road, Hounslow, 
Middlesex, TW3 4EE, UK 
Micropipettes, (Finnpipette): Jencon Scientific Ltd, Oxford, Cherry Court Way, Industrial 
Estate, Leighton Buzzard, Bedford LU7 8 UA, UK 
SDS-PAGE: Mini apparatus:PharmaciaILKB Biotecnology, Pharmacia House, Midsummer 
boulevard, Milton Keynes MK9 3HP, UK 
Western Blot Apparatus: Biorad. Laboratories Ltd. Caxton Way Holywell Industrial Estate, 
Watford, Hertz WD I 8RP, UK 
Millipore Filters: (0.2 and 0.45 J..lm pore size): Millipore (UK) Ltd. 11/15 Peterborough 
Road, Harrow, Middlesex HAl 2YH, UK 
Shaker Incubator: New Brunswick Scientific (UK) Ltd. 26-34 Emerald Street, London, 
WCIN3QA, UK 
Tissue culture 24-well plate: Linbro, Flow Laboratories, as above 
Tissue culture 96 well plate: Linbro, Flow Laboratories, as above 
Tissue culture flat-bottomed flasks and disposable pipettes: Sterilin Ltd. as above. 
FCA and FIA: Difco Laboratories Ltd, PO Box 14 B, Central Avenue, East Moseley, 
Surrey, KT8 OSE, UK 
DEAE-Shephadex, Protein A-Shepharose CL 4B, PharmaciaILKB as above. 
Enzyme, (HRP), Molecular weight markers, Agarose, Bromophenol Blue, Coomassie 
Brilliant Blue R, Enzyme substrates, Trypan Blue, Tween-20, Pristane, and PEGs: Sigma 
Chemical Co. Ltd. 
Foetal Calf Serum, HRPMI, RPMI-1640 with L-glutamine, Penicillin, Streptomycin: Gibco 
Europe, Ltd., UK 
Methotrexate: Lederle Laboratories Division, American Cyanamid Company, Pearls River, 
New York, USA. 
6.3. Appendix III 
6.3.1. Recipes for solutions and buffers 
Conjugate preparation: Horse-radish peroxidase (HRP). 
Enzyme: Horse-radish peroxidase (HRP) Type VI-A, RZ approx. 3.0, salt-free powder 
Sodium Borohydride Crystalline, approx. 98%. 
Sodium m-periodate, Crystalline. 
Antibody. For Conjugate: Sheep IgG anti-rabbit IgG. supplied by The Binding Site, UK. 
Buffers: 
Phosphate buffered saline (PBS) 0.1 MpH 7.2-7.4 
NaCI 8.0 g 
KH:zP04 0.2 g 
NaifUP04 2.8 g 
KCL 0.2g 
Make up to 1.0 litre in dw. 
Sodium acetate 1.0 roM pH 4.4 
Solution A- 8.2 g anydrous sodium acetate in 1 litre of dw 
Solution B- 6.005 g of glacial acetic acid in 1 litre of dw 
Add one part of solution A to two parts of solution B. Dilute to 1: 100 in dw to obtain 
working solution. 
Sodium carbonatelbicarbonate buffer ( 1), pH 9.5 
Na2C03 1.59 g (0.015 M) 
NaHC03 2.93 g (0.035 M) 
Dissolve together in dw to make 1 litre 
Sodium carbonatelbicarbonate buffer (2), 0.2 MpH 9.5 
Na2C03 21.2 g, dissolved to 1 litre in dw. 
NaHC03 16.8 g, dissolved to 1 litre in dw 
Add suficient volume of the N a2C03 solution to the 1 litre of bicarbonate to achieve pH 
Borate buffer, 0.1 MpH 7.4 
Boric acid 24.732 g, made up to 4 litres of dw 
Borax 19.0 g made up to 500 ml in dw. 
Add 115 ml of borax solution to the 4 litres of boric acid solution and adjust to pH 7.4 by 
further small additions. 
Sodium borohydride solution 
4.0 mg/ml sodium borohydride in dw. 
Enzyme Assays ELISA and Immunobloting. 
ELISA. 
Reagents: 
o-Phenylenediamine Free Base (OPD). 
Hydrogen Peroxide, 30% (w/w) solution. 
Polyoxyethylenesorbitan monolaurate (Tween-20) 
Buffers: 
Coating buffer - Carbonatelbicarbonate buffer 0.05 MpH 9.6 
Na2C03 1.59 g(0.015 M) 
NaHC03 2.93 g ( 0.035 M) 
Dissolve both salts in 1 litre of dw adjust pH by addition of monobasic or dibasic salt 
solution of the same molarity. 
Dilution/incubation buffer (PBS - Tween-20) 
PBS, 0.1 MpH 7.4 (see above for Conjugate) + 0.05% (v/v) Tween-20 
Washing solution: 
0.9% (w/v) saline (NaCI) with 0.05% (v/v) Tween-20 
Blocking solution: 
Dilution/Incubation buffer + 5% (w/v) Low fat milk (J Sainsbury.plc.) 
Substrate buffer for OPD pH 5.0 
Citric acid 7.3 g 
Na~04.2H20 11.86 g 
Dissolve both in 1 litre of dw adjust pH with acid or dibasic salt at the same molar 
concentration 
Substrate solution: 
Made up fresh, before. Dissolve OPD 40 mg/IOO ml of substrate buffer, mix and add 20111 
of30% H20 2 (Hydrogen Peroxide) 
Stopping solution: 
20 % (v/v) H2S04 in dw. 
Alkaline Phosphatase buffer. 
0.1 M Diethanolamine+ HCI + 1 roM Mg Ch pH 9.8 
95 ml ofDiethanolamine 
800 ml ofdw 
100 mg ofMgCh. 6H20 + 200 g NaN3 
Adjust pH to 9.8 with 1 N HCI. Complete to 1 litre. 
Soluble substrate 
N-p-nitrophenil alkaline phosphatase (PNPP). Tablets of 5 mg each. 
Substrate solution for Alkaline phosphatase 
Dissolve 10 mg ofPNPP in 10 ml of substrate buffer. 
Immunobloting: 
Electroblot apparatus from Bio-Rad 
Nitrocellulose menbrane 0.45 flm (Schleicher and Schuell) 
Enzyme Substrate: 
Diaminobenzidine (DAB) 
Hydrogen Peroxide (H20 2) 
Incubation DilutionIW ashingIBlocking buffer. 
PBS + 0.1 % (v/v) Tween-20 
Transfer buffer. Same as Polyacrylamide electrode buffer but without SDS and with 20% 
(v/v) methanol. 
Substrate buffer (DAB) 
Tris 50 mM pH 7.2. 
Tris 1. 81 g. Dissolve in 200ml of dw. Fix pH with 5 N HC. Complete 
volume to 300 ml and check pH. 
Substrate solution 
10 mg ofDAB/20 ml of substrate buffer. After dissolution filter in heavy grade filter paper, 
add 5 fll of 30% H202. 
Agarose gel techniques: 
Reagents: 
Agarose suitable for immunoelectrophoresis. 
Polyethylene Glycol (PEG) 6,000 mol wt. 
Bromophenol Blue, sodium salt. 
Buffers and solutions 
Barbitone buffer: 0.05 MpH 8.6. 
9.21 g of barbital ( 5.5 diethyl barbituric acid) 
51. 54 g of sodium barbitone. Dissolve both to a final volume of 3.0 litre of dw. Mix and 
add 5 g of sodium azide. Make up to 5 litres. 
PBS:prepare as shown above. 
Protein destaining solution 
Mix dw, glacial acetic acid and methanol in proportions 5: 1: 5 to volume required. 
Protein staining solution. 
Dissolve 5 g of Coomassie Brilliant Blue R to 1 litre of the destaining solution. 
Agarose solution: 
Dissolve 5 g of agarose powder to 500 m1 of hot barbitone buffer. Heat and stir until total 
dissolution of agarose. When dissolved completely add 15 g of PEG and mix until 
dissolved. 
Adsorbents Preparation: 
Reagents: 
Polyacrilamide beads (P 200) Bio-Rad Laboratories. 
Glutaraldehyde 25% aqueous solution. 
PBS 0.1 MpH 7.2-7.4 
Glycine (free base) >99%. 
KH2P04 anhydrous. 
Ethanolamine (free base) approx. 98%. 
Buffers and solutions: 
0.2 M acetate buffer pH 5.0: 
Solution A. Acetic acid. 11.55 ml in 100 ml of dw. 
Solution B. Sodium acetate. C2H30 2Na 16.4 g Make up to 100 m1 of dw. 
Mix 14.8 m1 of A + 35.2 m1 ofB, or multiples of these volumes. 
0.2 M HCI-glycine buffer. pH 2.8 or 2.2. 
To 100 m1 of 2 N HCI and enough 2 M glycine until pH drops to 2.8 or 2.2. Complete 
volume to 1 litre with dw. Verify the pH. 
1 M Ethanolamine pH 7.4. 
Add 3 m1 of Ethanolamine 99% to 17 m1 of dw. Ajust pH with conc. HCI. Complete 
volume to 50 m1 with dw. Check pH. 
IMKH2P04 
Dissolve 136.1 g ofKH2P04 to 1 litre of dw. 
Antivenom Absorptions: 
PBS 0.1 MpH 7.2-7.4 . . 
0.1 M Glycine-HCI pH 2.5 prepared as above for Adsorbents preparation and diluted 1:2. 
Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. 
Reagents: 
Acrylamide purity >99% 
N,N' -Methylene-bis-Acrylamide purity >98%. 
TEMED approx. 99% 
Glycerol >990/0 
Molecular weight markers: MW-SDS-Blue and SDS-6 (both from Sigma) 
2-Mercaptoethanol > 98% purity. 
Ammonium persulfate (APS) purity2:98% 
Bromopheno blue, sodium salt. 
Solutions: 
Acrylamide solution. 
Acrylamide 29.1 g 
N'N'-bis-methylene-acrylamide 0.8 g 
Dissolve both reagents to a final volume of 100 ml with dw. Filter in filter paper and store at 
4 C. in an ambar flask. 
Resolving gel buffer (1.5M Tris-HCl, pH 8.8 
27.23 g Trizma dissolved in approximate 80 ml of dw. Adjust to pH 8.8 with 1 N HC. 
Make up to 150 ml with dw. nd store at 4 C. 
Stacking gel buffer 0.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8 
6 g Trizma dissolved in approximate 60 ml of dw. Adjust to pH 6.8 with 1 N HC. Make up 
to 100ml with dw and store at 4C. 
10% SDS 
Dissolve 109 SDS in dw with gentle mixing and make up to 100 ml with dw. 
Sample buffer 
Distilled water 
0.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8 
Glycerol 
10% (w/v) 
0.05% (w/v) bromopheno blue. 
lOX Electrode buffer, pH 8.3 
Glycine 144.2 g 
4.4 ml 
1.0 ml 
0.80 ml 
1.6 ml 
0.2ml 
Trizma 30.3 g 
Dissolve in 800 ml of dw. Complete to 1.0 litre, pH should be around pH 8.3 without 
adjustment. Diltel: 10 to use. Store at 4 C. 
10%Ammonium pesulphate (APS) . 
Dissolve 0.5 g of APS to final volume of 5.0 m1 with dw. Make up fresh every day pnor to 
Gel Recipes 
Stacking gel preparation (SDS) 
Acrylamide solution 
Distilled water 
0.5 MpH Tris-HCl, pH 6.8 
10% SDS 
TEMED 
10% ammonium persulphate 
0.5 ml 
3.9 ml 
0.5 ml 
50 J.lI 
5.0 J.lI 
17.0 J.lI 
0.8 ml 
3.6 ml 
0.5 ml 
50 J.lI 
5.0 J.lI 
17.0 J.lI 
In the non-SDS procedure the SDS volume was substituted with dw. 
Resolving gel preparation 7.5% 10.0% 
Acrylamide solution 3.8 ml 5.0ml 
Destilled water 8.0ml 6.8ml 
1.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.8 3.0ml 3.0ml 
TEMED 7.5 J.lI 7.5 J.lI 
10%APS 50 J.lI 50 J.lI 
In the non-SDS procedure the SDS volume was substituted with dw. 
IgG purification DEAE. 
Gel matrix: DEAE Sephadex. A-25 (Pharmacia-LKB Technology) 
Eluting and Sample application buffer 
Phosphate buffer 0.02 MpH 7.2 
NaH2P04 0.778 g 
Na2HP04.12H20 5.16 g 
Dilute both to a final volume of 2 litres with dw. 
Column Washing buffer 
Eluting buffer + I M KCI 
KCI 74.55 g make up to I litre in Eluting buffer. 
Preparation of affinity column for B. ;araraca venom components 
Reagents: 
Protein A-Shepharose CL-4B 
Gel beads were received pre swollen in PB S. 
Dimethyl Pimelimidate dihydrochloride crystalline. 
0.2 M ethanolamine pH 8.0 prepared as above. 
Buffer: 
0.2 M Borate buffer pH 9.0. 
Solution A. 0.2 M boric acid 12.4 gin 1.0 litre of dw. 
Solution B. 0.05 M solution of Borax. 19.5 gin 1.0 litre ofdw. 
Mix 50 ml of A + 4.9 ml ofB. dilute to a total of200 ml. 
RadiolabelIed Conjugate 
Reagents: 
1251 in the form ofNaI. (Radio chemicals, Amersham) 
Chloramine T, sodium salt, Hydrate Crystalline. 
Sodium Metabisulfite, 2.5 mg Iml in phosphate buffer. 
3% BSA. 3mg in 100 ml of 0.05 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0. 
10% Trichloroacetic acid (TCA). Dissolve 10 g ofTCA to a final volume of 100 ml ofdw. 
Buffers: 
0.05 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0 
Dissolve 6.057 g in 500 ml of dw. Ajust pH to by adding drop wise 1 N HC. Complete 
volume to 1.0 litre with dw. 
0.5 M Phosphate buffer, pH 7.6 
Solution A. NaHP04 27.8 g. Make up to 1.0 litre with dw. 
Solution B. Na2HP04. 7H20 53.65 g. Make up to 1.0 litre with dw. 
Mix 13 ml of A to 87 ml ofB make up to 200 ml. Dilute 1:2 before use. 
Monoclonal Antibodies 
Reagents 
RPMI-1640 medium with L-glutamine (Gibco Europe) 
Foetal Calf Serum (FCS) (Gibco Europe) 
Cell line: BALB/c plasmacytoma X63/Ag8.653 (653 for short). 
Solutions 
Thioguanine 
Dilute 33.4 mg of Thioguanine in 100 ml ofdw. Mix thouroughly for 30 min. before fixing 
the pH. Warm to 800 C to help dilution. Add 1 M NaOh stepwise until pH is 9.5. Filter 
sterilize and aliquot in 5 ml volume into sterile universals. 
Aminopterin (Methotrexate): 
Stock solution at 25 mg/ml (sealed vial). Dilute 90 Jll to 80 ml of dw. Ajust the pH to 7.5 
with 0.01 M NaOH or 0.01 MHCl. Filter to sterilize aliquot and store at -200 C. 
2-Mercaptoetanol: 
Two drops of concentrated 2-Me to 10 m1 of saline. Filter to sterilize, aliquot and store at _ 
20 C. 
Foetal Calf Serum (FCS) 
Inactivate by heating FCS flask in a water bath at 56 C for 30 min. 
BTmedium 
A. Hypoxantine: 
Add 408 mg ofHpoxantine in 80 ml of dw with constant stirrring. Add slowly 1M NaOH 
until complete dissolution of Hypoxantine. Wait a couple of minutes between additions of 
NaOH. Complete volume to 100 ml. 
B.Thymidine: 
Dissolve 114 mg of thymidine in 100 m1 of dw. 
Combine A and B and make up to 300 m1 with dw. Mix thouroughly before adjusting the 
pH to 10.0 with 1 M NaOH. Filter to sterilize and aliquot in volumes of 5 mI. 
Store at -20C. 
HAT Medium 
1. Add 1 ml ofPenicilin and Streptomycin solution into 500 m1 ofRPMI. 
2. Add 100 ml of heat inactivated Foetal Calf Serum (20 %) 
3. Add 5 ml each ofHT and Methotrexate. 
4. Add 10 drops of2-Me. (2 drops per 100 m1 ofRPMI) 
Polyethylene Glycol (pEG) 
Weigh out 8 g of PEG 1500 itno a glass universal. 
Prepare ImM NaOH in dw add a drop of phenol red to it. 
Add 8 ml of this solution to the PEG and place at 37 C to dissolve the PEG. 
Sterilize by autoclaving with the universal loosely capped. Mark liquid volume for detection 
of any loss. If some liquid is lost return to original volume by adding 1 roM NaOH (sterile). 
Allow to coo~ prepare 3 m1 aliquots in sterile flasks and store at 4 C. 
Hepes-buffered RPMI medium (HRPMI). 
Is the RPMI-1640 medium buffered with 4.6 gil Hepes. Supplement with 2%FCS. 
HYBRIDOMA TECHNIOUE 
Plamacytoma cell line: 
The HAT-sensitive BALB/c mouse plasmacytoma X63/Ag8.653 or (653 was used). This 
cell line does not produce heavy or light chains of immunoglobulin. 
Production of Monoclonal antibodies usine X63-Ae 8.653 ceU 
Pre-warm Thioguanine-RPMI (ThRPMI) at 37 C in a water bath. Leave at this temperature inside 
the incubator. 
Prepare a bucket of ice to place the cell vial from the liquid nitrogen container. Take the cells from 
the container and bring to the water bath inside the ice bucket. 
Place the cell vial in the water bath and thaw completely. Wipe tube and place it inside the hood. 
Dilute cells with 1 ml of pre-warmed medium Thioguanine-RPlMI (ThRPMI) in any sterile tube. 
Centrifuge at 1500 rpm. Take off supernatant. Re-suspend in 5 mI of ThRPlMI pre-warmed 
at 37C. 
Take out four drops, place them in a Elisa plate well and add 1 drop of Trypan blue. Count the 
number of viable cells in a Hemocytometer. 
H needed adjust cell concentration (spin down as above, flick cells and add necessary volume of 
ThRPMI medium). To fuse : 1.0 x 107 cells are needed. To grow and select good cells: 0.1 x 106 
cells per well are needed in a 24 well Linbro plate. In this case fill wells with ThRPlMI up to a final 
volume of 1.5 - 2.0 mI. Grow for two weeks to harvest good cells. Change medium whenever needed. 
(ThRPMI medium becomes yellow, when number of cells in well is large) 
FUSION PROTOCOL 
1. COlUlt the .653 cells (1.0 x 107) and spin at 1700 rpm for 5 min. 
Discard supernatant and re-suspend in HRPlMI, approx. 20 mI. Prepare two 10 mI 
sterile plastic syringes with 10 mI each of HRPlMI and leave it aside with the 26 
gauge needle capped. 
2. Kill mouse by ether inhalation or neck displacement and remove spleen aseptically 
using a flame. Place it in a sterile Petri dish with 10 mI of HRPMI and wash 
carefully by gentle mixing. Repeat the procedure using a second Petri dish and place 
spleen in a third dish with 5 mI of medium. 
3. Hold spleen with one syringe and pWlcture it with the other throughout its surface 
and blowout cells by injecting slowly medium from one syringe into the near 
surface of the spleen. Repeat with other syringe changing from one place to another, 
Wltil spleen has a whitish appearance. Place four drops of the cell suspension into a 
well of a non-sterile microtitre plate. Add a drop of 1 % Trypan blue to the cell 
suspension of the microtitre plate, mix cells with a pasteur pippette and count viable 
cells in a Hemocyometer. Usually 0.6-1.2 x108 are fused with 107 plamacytoma 
cells. 
4. Spin separately the .653 and spleen cells at 500 g for 5 min. Discard supernatants 
and flick cells. To each cell pellet add 10 ml ofRPMI and mix gently. Mix both cell 
suspensions, by pouring both into a sterile round bottomed glass tube and spin down 
at 400 g rpm for 7 min. Remove supernatant carefully by pipetting out. 
5. Add 5 drops of alkaline RPMI (room temperature), warm pellet at 37 c in the 
water bath and add PEG (0.8 ml) quickly, using the pre-prepared syringe left in the 
incubator. Rotate tube in the water bath for 21/2 min. Add slowly 2 ml of pre-
warmed media (37 C), over a period of 2 min. 
6. Add slowly 20 ml ofRPMI over a period of 5 min. with a pipette. 
7. Spin at 400 g for 15 min .. 
8. Take out supernatant by pouring off and add 20 ml of HAT medium, pre-warmed at 
37C. 
9. Replace cap and invert tube to resuspend cells. Dispense with the aid of a Pasteur 
pipette one drop of the cell suspension into each well of a 96 well tissue culture 
Linbro plate. Skip outer wells to avoid contamination. Then add 1 00 ~l of HAT 
medium to each well. Incubate at 370 C in the presence of 5% CO2. 
10. Add 50 III of HAT (pre-warmed) on day 5 to each well. 
11. Change the HAT medium on day 9 or 11. Depends on growth of cells. 
12. CHECK FOR CONTAMINATION EVERY DAY 
HYBRID CELLS MAINTENANCE (FUSED CELLS) 
Changing of the medium on day 9 or 11 is done by taking out 3/4 of the supernatant of each well and 
adding 150 JlI of HAT medium at 37C. 
After change, keep growing cells until clones are big enough to be screened. 
To screen clones take out individually most of the supernatant from each well and test for MAb 
production by Radioimmunoassay (RIA). 
Top up wells with HAT at 37C with approx. 150 JlI of medium. 
Positive wells have to be transferred to 24 well Linbro plate with only 1.0 ml of HAT at the most. 
After transferring cells to Linbro plates, and adding medium, mix and transfer a drop to the original 
well. 
Keep growing hybridomas and split when necessary to the same plate if possible, identifying each 
with the number of the well on the original plate, e.g. Al or F2. 
Transfer all of the cells of one well to a small flask and add 5 to 10 ml of HAT medium. Top up well 
on the 24 well plate again. 
At this stage it is important to freeze some cells and inject others into mice pre-sensitized with 
Pristane. Use cells from one flask. 
6.4. Appendix IV 
6.4. 1. Reactivity index for the preparation of the venom 
adsorbents with proportionally added venoms. 
As the original glutaraldehyde adsorbents each contained equal amounts of each venom 
included in that particular adsorbent, and accepting that all venoms were equally 
insolubilized, it can be assumed that any remaining cross-reactivity of the absorbed 
antivenom would be proportional to the antigenic similarity of the venoms. If one takes the 
ELISA results of antivenoms absorbed in such adsorbents, and fix the homologous reaction 
in all as 100%, and compares these with the heterologous reactions, as a relative 
percentage, then a reactivity index can be determined. Then, choosing a total venom content 
for the adsorbent, the relative proportional amounts of each venom can be calculated based , 
on their percentage values .. 
Crossreactivity index obtained from the ELISA of the absorbed antivenoms. 
Anti-Bothrops atrox venom % reactivity based on OD of absorbed antivenom 
Assay No. % Reactivity 
B. atrox B. iararaca B. iararacussu B. alternalus B. mooieni B. neuwiedi B. cotiara L. muta C.de 
1 100 79.8 72.0 77.0 48.5 76.6 92.3 75.0 84.0 
2 100 24.0 24.0 103 77.6 27.7 85.0 18.5 16.6 
3 100 20.5 32.1 91.0 85.7 35.7 80.3 25 
Average 100 41.4 42.7 90.4 71.2 46.6 85.8 39.5 33.5 1~451.1 
L = 451.1 = 100% 9.17 9.46 20.0 15.7 10.3 19.0 8.75 7.42 
Anti-BothroEs lpraracussu venom % reactivity based on OD of absorbed antivenom 
Assay No. 0A, Reactivity 
B. iararacussu B. iararaca B. alternatus B. atrox B. mooieni B. neuwiedi B. cotiara L. muta C.de 
1 100 2.6 12.6 33.3 4.6 
2 100 5.9 15.4 46.1 
3 100 19.3 36.6 8.13 
4 100 6.3 3.5 10.46 32.5 48.2 
5 100 30.5 39.0 29.3 27.5 21.9 
6 100 30.5 39.0 117.0 89 21.9 45.1 2.92 
Average 100 1.05 7.08 6.5 34 44.0 41.4 15.45 0.48 1~150 
L= 150= 100% 0.7 4.72 4.3 22.6 29.3 27.6 10.3 0.32 
Anti-BothroEs mo01..eni venom % reactivity based on OD of absorbed antivenom 
Assay No. % Reactivity 
B. mooieni Biararaca B. iararacussu B. alternatus B. atrox B. neuwiedi B. cotiara 
L. muta C.de 
1 100 7.8 53.8 24.7 24.0 65.5 29.0 
14.6 9.7 
2 100 10.0 44.3 26.0 30.7 48.4 
19.0 24.8 11.2 
3 100 26.6 25.5 24.6 24.6 37.0 
21.0 20.0 20.0 
4 100 12.7 75.6 46.0 44.0 60.0 
54.0 32.0 18.4 
Average 100 14.3 49.8 25.0 30.8 52.85 
30.7 15.3 10.3 
6.2 21.7 11.0 13.4 23.0 13.4 
6.68 4.5 
L 229 100% 
Anti-BothroEs alternatus venom % reactivity based on OD of absorbed antivenom 
Assay No. 0A, Reactivity 
B. iararacussu B. atrox B. mooieni B. neuwiedi B. cotiara 
L. muta C. d e 
B. alternatus B. iararaca 
100 9.0 19.4 
14.0 8.0 38.4 
18.0 69.6 6.0 31.3 80.0 
17.6 5.88 
2 100 12.7 44.8 18.6 17.3 
20.8 23.7 18.2 18.6 3 100 21.6 9.45 10.6 
27.2 13.0 1l.8 15.4 
4 100 17.3 32.0 11.0 7.0 
11.0 34.4 27.0 12.0 5 100 14.0 11.3 8.1 
17.2 32.0 13.4 17.0 
Average 100 13.0 
20.4 8.5 11.0 29.0 
7.2 5.2 
L 157 100% 8.3 11.0 
To find the amount of venom to add from each species, the numbers in bold in the last row 
of the tables were used. So from a total of 20 mg of venom, in the example of B. alternatus 
in table IV, it would be as follows: 
B.jararaca 8.30% of 20 mg 1.7 mg 
venom 
B. jararacussu 11.0% of 20 mg 2.2mg 
venom 
B. atrox venom 20.4% of 20 mg 4.1 mg 
B. moojeni 8.50% of 20 mg 1.7 mg 
venom -
B. neuwiedi 11.0% of 20 mg 2.2mg 
venom 
B. cotiara venom 29.0% of 20 mg 5.8mg 
L. muta venom 7.20% of 20 mg 1.4 mg 
C. d collineatus 5.20% of 20 mg 1.0mg 
venom 
TOTAL= 20.0 mg 
6.5. Appendix V 
6.5.1. Decrease in the IgG content of the absorbed antivenoms. 
IgG content decrease in the absorbed antivenoms 
Pwified IgG (DEAE) Un-absorbed No. of Absorbed Coo.c. Decrease ratio No. of Absorbed Decrease ratio 
Coo.c. ofIgG absotptioos ofIgG (mglml) absotptioos Coo.c. of IgG 
(mglml) (mg/ml) 
anti-B. jararaca 9.3 2 1 9 4 0.66 14.0 
anti-B. jararacussu 10.1 2 1.7 6 4 1.1 9.2 
anti-B. alternatus 7.6 2 1.25 6 4 0.77 9.9 
anti-B. atrox 12.0 2 1.03 12 4 0.44 27.0 
anti-B. moojeni 11.3 2 1.36 8 4 0.4 28.0 
ti B'd' 19 3 2 3 6 5 4 0.37 52.0 an - . neu~e I. . 
The concentration of IgG was measured by the absorption at 280nm using the extinction 
coefficient shown in the Material and Methods section. 
6.6. Appendix VI 
Here are presented the results of the RIA for the screening of clones for alltivenom activity 
and the screening for B. 11loojeni venom specificity of clones and ascitic fluids. 
Results from the screening of clones for anti-B. 11loojeni reactivity. Positive clones were 
further cultured by the limiting dilution method. 
p(.,nAdETFF<S 0'\ 
(~1 Tn:: J  '\ 2~~ 
02 TIME (SEC) 0~60 
iB I S (\ 5 "" T) 0 1 
04 REPLICATES 01 
(~S p rn NT 0 lIT 5 
06 FIRST SEQ.NO e01 
(17 HETHOD (1-6) 0~ 
(i,iS SPILL (0-1) ~0 
09 SEQ-CODE 
nAT nET SEQ. 
') .' 
r; ... 
" .:.. 
'1 .. 
... " 
1 "1 "1 'J ", '., .. ~ , 'I t 1 ~ 'Q u) 11 '/ .. ~ 'J .: .. II ,: ' ,. \, I' I , ,:. /,:) ,c, Ii , ',. ,I , ,'.,' I" ~ ". ,,.', ' ' 
- ,,~ 
- ,,' 
" -,,:' 
9:1. :? 
.:. . I 
71 .3 
1.\ 3 .. ':\ 
'1 7 .. ,. , 
,:l "7.'" \.),1 " 1  (1 
4 '1 38 3.8 aW:5"~AF 9 -
4 3 39 4.2 0'/'6.13 
4 4 4G 4.3 6J b "~:{1 A ~i 9 
4 C' III 4.2 .J ();,~ 5 ,,('), 
" 6 42 3.11 13J3.. '11 
'} 'I f\ r; ~ \.. " 
4 7 43 3.6 D b~,~" 3) 
A\ 8 44 3.9 I3m .. IJ BE? 
4 9 45 A.3 65'1" 5 
4 1 0 46 I 2  1 'I 2~,~" ~7 - 'J ('J 
4 I 1 47 43.2 2'1 .B 
4 1 2 48 57.7 1) II 2 
I'" 49 -99.9 'j :) . , ... 
C' '1 50 3.2 'I ODH. AD B gi) J ,c 
r: 3 51 3. I) 93J . \~ :J" \' d 
f: 4 52 j C' w.~ee/I IJ I  J .. C' 53 6.7 ') "7 I " ,) J J ... / II \~ 
r: t, 54 4.3 ' ") "5 'EC I d ()(j .. " " 
I:' j 5S 5.4 lilA" r d I 
r. (1 56 3.4 I'il' \ ~ec it d ':~ "'-,~ . 
C' 9 57 4 ':-' J . ~ \.,7", " 
r: 10 58 -99.9 F~ II 5 .J 
r:;' I I 59 35.6 2/" 3 ,) 
r. 12 60 5 I  , \'-;' '1 d / IIJ 
c':) 'I 93" 2 g.g n 
I 2 62 
~ "I 8~'~ 7.. ~ [)D ~ .~  I 
6 ~ 63 3.8 B'I I " <, 
f, 4 64 3.6 1369 IO<D W r: 
6 r: 65 3.7 P,;? ')' ':J " 
.',', ... " ( 
6 6 66 8.3 r '","  41 j 0 I ~~;'~ ,J " ED 
/, 7 67 j 'i I I  -  ~~;:: ;JHrM 6 8 68 6.9 
6 9 69 6.5 \ 314 .. 7 r ,~, 
() i f\ , ~ 713" -99.9' :? n 1 
(, 1 1 71 .\ 7  ~ '1'1.6 
;, 1 2 72 3 'l  \ ;1') .9 
':1 73 } J.n '\ :.,~ . '\ 
I '", 74 3.3 1 n:UJj /l,t.3 I -
7 3 jr:' 3.7 B:::,;'.3 .3 I J 
I r:;' 77 1\.3 118,,6 I " 9\ 4. '11 n t 1) -, 6 78 3.b I u '" 
j "7 79 4  ~, ""'1') '1. r' ~" 1n I I 
'id4" 91 (jt-7 8 8~ 3.7 
"7 9 81 3.7 Bm .. J I 
7 10 82 63.2 I () " 9 ., (1 13 3:.3 30" 7 I 
1 : 84 -99.9 
,::' 1 
,)" I 
n B~:5 .. 0 .0 
8 2 86 -99.9 'I;~)n &FJ 8 3 87 58.9 
0 4 88 4.9 ~19 6 .. (j] C ~ 3 
[1 l~ 89 5.8 JI"I ' ) -.J ,') ,. (') 
8 6 90 3.7 nn6"~IjFq 
8 7 91 9.9 I S'I " I 
8 8 92 4.8 ~:;47" fl ~rS 
R 9 93 5.0 ..:\ 9~~; " ~ 
8 10 94 -99.9 7" 4 
8 1 1 95 63.8 14 .. 0 
8 I:> 96 -99.9 ? "8 
9 9) . I:'.  JIl" .J 1 ~,1.:-5 
9 2 98 3.8 (?L~JeFh 
9 3 99 3.8 u'l 7 ".<  
9 4 10e 8.3 :?'13,,~ ~(~ 
9 6 102 4.0 "'ll~ I:' 4]r;fC} I dJ .. 
9 7 103 4.3 ' ')r::-D ~,." 4 f rJ 
9 8 104 3.6 9 I 'I " ~1l3" \ 
9 9 105 3.7 B 5:~ " a. 
9 1 0 le6 2.8 '1464" 4J +ve 
9 1 I 107 41:' '1 d.~ 
,- '1 .. ,. 
A:~~">  /. I 
9 1 2 10B 39.2 :~:.~  ~:i 
'1(' \(19 41" 4 'Iii ' ,') " 
10 3 1 I 1 9.9 1 c') I  t 
10 <\ 112 3.6 BB4 .. <.~ f?::>C 'J-. 
r 11 3 3.8 "7 '\ t" 'q J ,. Jo " ':t . .1 
10 t, 1 1 4 3.9 (3'1 a" 9] lSC,) 
10 "' 115 3.8 "70'1 6 I " , .. , .. : , I 
1 (} R 116 4.3 6 6 ~~ " J 10(;t ' 
1 \1 113 I 1 8 
., 7 '14 M" 2 \.\1 ~  I 
10 f 1 119 38.2 ::~~:) , '( 
10 12 120 
r:'"1 "1 
J I  I 'I ~~  :~ 
,',' 1 ':) 'I .. _<) 9" 9 
, .. , 
\}  (j 
1 I 2 122 3.6 or. -} c; < di)",' ~~.7 
1 I 3 123 
C''j 7 'I <? .1 J L  I 
1 7' ,1. :) 
1 ") 8"~ <1 
11 ,I t,", H' P (1 D 
125 ,1. 8 
<" 6 ' J 
,. ~:I .. (), C\ 
1 ., , 3.5 (l:~" 9 I I? (1 " () ,.1". , J . 
I 1 7 127 3,5 
(;' J', .. 6 , 
II 8 128 j.8 I~ 2:~ " n (?, ~ 0 
t 1 9 129 ~.8 Ii I,. .. L. IJI.' 
-99.9 '7 ". II II 131 
/  "j 
I 1 12 132 61.6 
'I ~~ 133 4?" 7 'U3.6 
1 2 . 134 4.5 5? I. ;1 ,C Ii 
12 1 135 4.6 5/3. () 
12 J\ 136 6.4 ?;,n ,/; 'c8Lf 
12 t:" 137 5.8 J ,349. ': ' 
12 (, 138 3.9 3J5" 7 C~~ 12 ., 139 3.8 ? 9"J  9. / 
12 8 1 4" 5.6 ~~ 14 .. 6 t el\ 
12 9 141 5.8 
,501 "~ 1 2 1 ~ 1'\2 1 2.8 'I I':~ .. \Ie \ .. " '1 
12 I 1 143 55.9 'I . ,.;' 'I t ) () . " 
1 ') 12 144 3 A  1 '-,"I (-' ':) .. "._/  l 
'I :-5 1 4~:,) 43."1 :?O .'/ 
13 ") 1 46 7.6 :m'QIG~ /1 ... 
I 3 3 147 9.0 IH? " 
1:1 r: 11\9 .\  J d &, ", . 6 
13 6 150 9.8 17 <IJ ::-/"~ t(~ 
13 7 151 9. 1 '/ I,, 4 .. 6 
t3 8 152 4.9 ;:; 'I B .. {fc c J () 
13 9 153 5. \1 oJ ~ I" 
13 10 154 -99.9 '7 I I  'I 
13 1 I 155 59.6 1:5" 1 
13 " 2 156 .0 .. v 
14 1':~'" ..:1 7 ,,~:7 " ~3  (, \ .. 1 . -
311. D' CP~ 1 4 ") 158 \~ . 5 i_ 
14 3 159 7.0 2DA .n 
"34 ~ 0 ,1 14 4 160 4.4 _ .. ",I C ... ..J 
H c 16 , 4.2 L~ 8 .. (, q d 
,:~ ,;\ 2 (~J c t: , '1 6 162 4.9 \..1 ,. . ,  
 '''' J 
14 7 1 63 .\ .9 ~l 9;OJ Of 1 I 
"") r: ~ \C . . 0. 14 fl 164 "  9 :)". J .. " (",.. ,,' '~ 
1 4 9 165 
r. I""J 4M1 .. ' d  .:.. 
1 4 1 \3 166 -99.9 'I  I 
14 11 167 68.8 I:? .. 9 
I 1 12 168 71 .3 I:? .. I 
I ',:j 16(} 33,,4 :;(3.:3 
1 r~ ',) 170 ~.7 9 :?B  (u C ~ J. d 
1 5 3 171 3.7 
8(~8 .\:~ 
3.6 /) 1 'D () ,r. 4 172 elo .. ' C ,) 
15 r: 173 3.5 
(3~:) 2 II \~ 
4.7 I:~' I '0 ~q 15 6 174 dOl " .. : C ,~ 
15 7 175 4~~ 57'1.9 .. 
(ll',:~ " g~c Fe: 15 B 170 ",,6 '" ~. ~. J 
1 5 9 177 4  I 
.. () .. I 
15 10 178 82.6 
12 .. 7 
15 t 1 179 31  <\ 
3'1.<3 
1 5 I::> 18lJ 37.8 
2 A\ .~) 
I,:t In'l " J "  ,' 
1 6 'i 182 7.8 1""~ :fo L. .. /().I C F i / 
16 3 183 '7  6 24:7 .~) 
lit ~, 184 r: r. ~';'8 ,,~qc ~ry ,J.J 
16 r:' 185 ~I .0 .} ~l'/ I ,,6.-
16 6 186 5.3 'P2 .i~G r. ~ 
16 7 187 "  9 49~.1l I G 
16 8 '188 1'7.8 8.~ICH 
16 9 189 1 6  9 h7J. I . 
16 10 190 -99.9 :3 II 2 
16 11 1 91 45.2 W.7 
1ft 12 192 23.2 ~l~  B 
'I) 193 (S..:\.? 1:-5.2 
17 2 194 3.6 '-)~ ~ 
I '7 3 195 3.6 
d"I:;:' '~' c flO 9.,,,,) . 
17 r: 197 5.8 .) 31.J .( 
17 6 198 -, 7 rOO? 4 "ij ~ ~ ,)  I :l,,' ,,/ ~ '1 
I? 7 199 3.9 ~7')' 8 I ~ ... 6 " 
17 8 200 4.5 ~~H. (;1 cG ~ 
17 9 201 4.7 ",54 .. a 
17 1 0 202 2.9 'I "5 B'i 9}1 ; , ,,',.,. 
17 II 203 ~9.7 34" 0 
1 '7 12 204 51  ;\ 1 ~7 " 3 
'IB 20::,) ".:')  (j 
1 n :~ 206 .\. 2 b~::j'l  D C'<Qh 
1 8 3 207 15.8 - /. " j,:~  ( 
18 .\ 208 4.3 Ii';:;  .. ~,~' (I (1 } D 
18 L 209 ,', .7 d ,} ., 
10 () 210 3.9 -'<nil ' g c ,." '''~ 'Dr") 
10 7 211 4.4 
r.~ 8"7 '1 v-
18 8 212 6.0 :, ),J" ~ i 013" 
18 9 213 
r: 7 J 9()" \_1 ~ J 
18 1 {} 211\ 2.9 r .. ~ 8~,~" -, .rve 
1 f.l II 215 36.9 
1 ,c 'I 
,..(.) . ,: .. 
I 8 12 216 6 I .I.t 14" 2 
19 2'1 ::' ~'~ (; . ~:.) " ~j . :.'~ 
1 ? 2 218 6.5 "5 ~q fl {)C\f'" ., ,. " 'J 
3 219 7.3 
~ "1 "~ v . 
.. f)~ . ,. 
19 4 220 4.3 637 .. ~j'll1Nq 
221 "  I 
6':;'(/ ' 
,I F;.~ DC J\l 
19 6 222 3.7 
3.. II,' 
, 9 7 223 :-L7 Fn~" ') I 
~}'I L D lJ }),.1 19 0 224 5.6 
9 225 
r" r -<l 1'1 " ? 
19 ~J  "J 
19 H) 226 :1. n 
'I ~l :l.\ " 8] ~.ve 
19 11 ~27 S?6 
1 ~ :;.. I 
19 P 228 411.8 
2:~~ II b 
:~~d 22 q 
20 2 230 
20 3 231 
20 il 232 
20 5 233 
2'1 6 ~34 
20 ? 235 
20 8 236 
2(1 9 737 
:0 \0 238 
20 11 2~9 
h'J 122;)0 
2 242 
~ 243 
4 ., 4 
r. 245 J 
6 246 
'7 247 J 
8 248 
9 249 
10 250 
1 1 251 
12 252 
2~;] 
2 254 
3 255 
4 256 
5 257 
6 25B 
22 7 259 
22 8 260 
22 9 261 
22 10 262 
2:2 11263 
2212264 
:,n 2 ll:~ \,)"J 
23 2 266 
23 3 267 
23 4 269 
23 r 269 J 
23 6 270 
n 7 271 
:3 8 '1'7 ':l ,...1 A .. 
23 9 273 
23 10 274 
23 1 I 275 
n 1 ~ '276 
1:',1 I:' 
JO .. _, 
'1...1  I 
'1. 7 
.\. 2 
.1. 1 
4  1 
10.  
34  \ 
-(,i 9 .. <.t 
J)  2 
J\. 3 
I  I' 
6 7 .1 
5\  1 
'.'- 99,,9 
Cl. J 
-99.9 
93 .. 2 
4  1 
-. '7 
j  : 
.\. 7 
-99.9 
3 ~ co \ \ I  ,J 
",~) . ~ 
300 .. ()] A-I}) C. 
'7 t .,' U .:;J J.. ,,. \) 
;,19,1 <fl' b t , \J n  . I 
::)d 5 ,,/ 1) I) " 
"~'\ 'J ~ .-J I ~" nD 
, l:'1 t' IV_ 
(:) Jd" '0 
'?'9 ,il n nfl, \ 
. ~ . .,:J V~' lJ 
690 .. 2-.1 
'I 61 .. aJ ~ \J ~ 
64'1'::U DO 11 6'1 q I., 
" .\:-'1 
i I'~" <J ~ t)I"~I'. ~ .; 
6:~ U u l 
6?9 .. (310rf3 
~:; ~9 .. (J 
~j:~ B " D t:?t1t\ 
27'1 '" 
1:5" 9 
]Ci .. 7 
16 .. 3 
r-'- IV r H cl:J I~: D2 " 
73'\ .7 
n,~ 2.fl DN 
:idB .', 
"5\ D D F'I ~~\T5: ~ J 
(~ I; . fl Dr- L\ 
.I' b(,) 1\ 
:? .. 1 
3~,~ I C, 
19 I :~; 
2A 2?7 
2'1 'I 278 
1.4 3 279 
2Al " 280 
2A 5 281 
2A 6 282 
24 7 283 
24 a 284 
24 9 285 
24 10 286 
24 11 287 
2'1 12 288 
fi':~ 
~: ... \J 2B9 
'j,," 
Ld 2 290 
25 3 291 
25 4 292 
25 r 293 ,) 
25 6 294 
25 7 '"'9 r / .:... J 
..:..d 8 296 
'jl:' 
i-. ,J 9 297 
')1:' 
.:.J 10 298 
'")1:' 
.:.J 11 299 
?e' .. ,J 12 300 
::\.; 3.?J'1 
26 '1 3132 i. 
26 :3 303 
26 A 304 
26 E:' 305 J 
2(, 6 306 
26 7 307 / 
26 8 308 
26 9 309 
26 1 0 310 
'26 1 , 311 
2t, I~ ~n 2 
;?::7 3'1] 
') -, 'I 31'\ ... 1 
'")7 3 315 1.1 
~ I 4 31b 
27 E:' 317 J 
27 6 318 
27 7 319 I 
27 8 320 
321 '17 ? '-, 
"17 I tl 322 .:., 
'17 II 323 ~, 
'-, 12 324 
L '") 
~ J " ..:.. 
1 4  2 
-99.9 
--<,f 9 " <.i 
1\  1 
.i. 3 
l\. 1 
A  4 
3 t:i . ., 
:7 6 I, ~\~ 
r. '") 
J .. i.. 
3 ~  I 
41  \ 
4'\  II 
-99" <J 
UJ  fl 
f 3  8 
I:' .., 
d  , 
-99.9 
4  I, 
-99.9 
:?..:I .1:5 
::,H,}  (1 
oil] ':~D(1i 
6',:~:',~ .7' 
,."', 1 
,:"., 1 .. I D(1 ~\. 
~.'~::.~ 9 III 
? ,:\ 4 ., 1.1"/ D~~) 
r.~ 9{') 3 
"J ., " .> ( 
?,' '1 'DG .Ii 
"r:~" '-I q 
1,-, .. 6:;' 
'I 'j 9" IJ ,:_ 0" 
'1,., 'j 
",' .. \) . ,,'., 
'I 'I  i;; 
r4'3 'D D( c J C. '.J .:t J 
?"7 \ '" 
A.. \ ::":  \, ~ " 
~:~ g .. ,:'~  D (,//1) 
J b ' .: ... ,)..-- ( 
(99 "'1 D~' '1 l. ," I:.. :Q 
7' A 3" ~ t I'') 
"''1 r: ;D .. :~ , 
,J ~ II J ,1 
..:\ u'::~ " 7~ i 
'1"3~' 7)~ve " 6,,/ 
2=~ It 9 
;) . () ~ 
.. "/ .; "/ 
I,~~~.:I . :;1 t 1) i I 
1..,\)  ,_ 
\~ 9 "~I ~ 13J) 
UB"o. '1 ~ 
~l'~ ~ .. ,;ll ~ lJ U 
.lJ~J f; 01U 
"-7'1 :J ,,) If \,J 
'13],1,,2) 
3~:J " 7 
~7 ft B 
2B 32j .. G  :? 
28 2 326 1 2.8 1(14 "~~ [C3 
2B 4 3=~ B lL 8 
. ~.~3. ~:~l (G b 20 t:" 329 10.9 J 1 ... _ 4 .. 'l.J 1 
28 6 336 4.6 ~~(i 1 .. 0 eo) " 
28 -, 331 A  ;\ ()\j b .. p]-t.V3 I 
28 8 332 40.6 24" 6 
28 9 333 41.9 'J'i ", ... I . ,. ;. 
20 1 0 334 1 1\  5 9? .. ,4}-'ve, 
2[( 1 \ 335 55.9 'I () . :~~ 
28 1 ~ 336 85.2 9.9 
:?7 3"1."7 "<"19.9 '") ~\ ',,).' 
~i:i ::il ctf.1 29 2 338 2\.0 
29 4 340 8.1 7.) ~ " '11 r. J) 
29 L 341 7.\; 
,., 1-- ') , I 
J i:;;::;j fDb 29 b 342 17. 1 
29 i 3\3 19.0 r:"7 i , ,J.' .,,..  
Test for specificity of the cultured c10nes that displayed anti-B. moojelli venom reactivity 
and of ascitic fluid from some of the positive clones. 
Iii AO'( :> 
I~UTO 
PAr<M1[TFHS \)'1 
VJ 1 I D :: J - '1 :.'>. 5 " .. :> 
vl 2 TIN E ( S Fe) 0 Q; ~ (j .. -:::-
J 3 I S (1 2 5 - I) 0 1 - .> 
(H r~ E P I. I C (\ T UJ \J 1 ... ) 
(15 P fi I NT 0 U T S I 'J :.~ ,3:.' 20 , ~~I,j , :?.:~ . ::.~'J ,~') ~ ::.'>. 11 :' ~.~ \\ ,,;~ 0 y (? ,',:;'" ,:.:),') ,H 
."' .:.-
,3 7 ~I F. T II 0 II (1, -b) {j 0 ._. ::-
~~l nsf" J L L 1 -- 1) (' 0 -::-
09 nFU-c(rl'lE 
f:(\'1 IILl SL(1. 
'1 .. 
') .. 
'i .. 
.. ..I 
I :,':~ 
'I ~j 
:.' 6" 2 
3 I n 6 
--??{? 
'I 1 .1/ 
57. 1 
(J I' 
I,. ,) 
1 f) " n 
10. 9 
17 to 1 
:) 1  'I 
1 :L4 
1"1" " 
1 ~. 8 
1 11. ~j 
171;/ 
.. <jIJ.g 
.,., ,'j 
If ~:) 
I:'; . ,,' 
~;I I  ,"\ 
(l ~.:.~  ::.~ 
'" 0 .' 
"," 1 It';) 
..;) I" ., 
9B" ~ 
9~? It 2 
9'l.. 5 
7i.l .. 9 
,I '7 
c:>."\ 
,,,', ':ta 
Cb )1, 
S \Jf{fo 
A) :':p 
I.) 2 ;50 
4 3 39 
4 4 4~ 
4 ~j 41 
4 (, 42 
4 7 43 
4 0 44 
'1 9 45 
I) 1 0 46 
At \ ., 1\ 7 
A\ 1 2 48 
". \',6.1 49 
d 2 5(1 
d 3 51 
r. 1\ 52 J 
r. 0::- 53 " J t:" 6 54 d 
r. 7 55 J 
,/ n 51 
,. 9 57 
t:' 1 0 50 ,J 
,::' 1 I ~i9 d 
r:- '12 be 
(~\ 1 (:) , 
tl -'2"-62--
/) n 68 
f-, 9 69 
() H~ 7'~ 
t, '11 71 
IJ 12 /2 
~ .. - ~--.---.. 
"<} 9 .. 9 
99. ? 
-99.9 
"7"1 "7 
J I  I 
"99.9 
'11.'\ 
-99.9 
-<,;I9.(? 
 i' 
~j? It :S 
6~L fl 
rHL 3 
.. {' 
99.9 
 .. 99 .. 9 
""1 i 
l I ... f . ~, 
AI?  A 
-16. ~j 
.:\ . ~:) 
H. (~ 
',g.~~ B. F 
.. f' ' 
. .. ';' . )'}t" 
1 3 ,d) B, ~ 
.. ,] ~ o,- ,'f 
~~9~ 13 JVI()~ 
'\ I .. a 
I "I., I 
t.l'12 
2") 9 
,.:  It 
;1 ,10 
:5  () 
Oi .,., 
II J.I 
.f :;; 
., 6 .. J 
'I 5 " ,'S 
IB .. 9 
(?,16 
:::.i ,,7 
J , .. :1 
6 .. ":1 
B ... , 
I" .. i1 
I" .. I 
f:: (lev 
S. ,:J:-
J + 3> 
Printed in Oreal Brilain. 
0041~IOI/93 $6.00 + -.00 
~ 1993 Pergamon Press Lid 
" SPECIES-SPECIFIC DETECTION OF VENOM' ANTIGENS FROM 
'- . '" SNAKES OF THE 'BOTHROPS AND LACHESIS GENERA: . 
Co G: D. HENE~E and rio CATTY 
" .,'... ,,,., I.".{ -, '7 ' 
Department of Immunology. Medical School. The Uni~ersity of Birmingham. Vincent Drive. Edgbaston. -. 
-, 0 '. 0 Birmingham BIS 2TT. U.K. 0 0 .,",. 0  
-t ,"-" 
(Received 17 February 1992; accepted2S November (992) 
L. G. D. HENEINE and D.:CATTY.'Species~specific'detection of venom antigens 
from, snakes of the Bothrops and Lachesis _ genera." Toxicon ,31, 591-603" 
1993.~Venom-insoluble adsorbents were employed to absorb out the cross-
,reacting antibodies from monovalent polyclonal antivenoms. The absorbed 
anti venoms were tested by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay against' 
'homologous and' heterologous venoms and' showed' species-specificity 
throughout a range of venom concentrations. The same absorbed antisera 
were used in immunoblots under non-reducing conditions as probes to reveal 
species-specific antigens. In all cases studied this was achieved. The range of. 
mol. wts of specific antigens was between 20,000 and. 120,000, approximately. 
,Venoms added to human serum experimentally were specifically detected by 
their homologous absorbed antivenom antibodies: The work here described 
could be important in the development of diagnostic assays for envenomings 
involving snakes from the Bothrops and Lachesis genera. 
/ .. ',' ,.,., 
INTRODUCTION " 
r i ;,' -I'" _. ,( . 
SNAKE envenomings causing death or disability are a major public health problem in many 
countries. Specific diagnosis is made'difficult by, the large numbers of venomous speCies 
present within some regions and the lack of specific diagnostic reagents which could be 
applied to a simple and robust test system. The lack of appropriate reagents, the need for 
expensive equipment and/or low sensitivity and specificity of results to date, have 
hampered the widespread use of routing diagnostic test such as RIA and ELISA in most 
countries (MrNTON, 1987; NELSON, 1989). The first'step in providing a simple specific test 
is the preparation of highly specific anti venom reagents: In Brazil, specimens from the 
genera Bothrops. Lachesis. Crotalus and Micrurus have overlapping distributions (HOGE 
and ROMANO-HoGE, 1978/79). Bothrops species account for 90% of the snakebites in 
Brazil (MINISTERIO DA SAUDE, 1986). Statistics based on confirmed diagnosis by the visual 
identification of the snake carried out by particular regional medical centres is not, 
however, representative of the country as a whole. CARDOSO and BRANDO (1982) showed 
that Bothropsjararaca was responsible for 93.5% of the snakebites treated in the Hospital 
Vital Brazil, in' the state of Sao Paulo. 0 KOUYOUMDJIAN and POLIZELLI (1988) showed, 
\  On leave from Fundaciio Ezequiel Dias. Centro de Pesquisa e Desenvolvi~ento. Rua General C~rn~iro. 80. 
30SSO-Belo Horizonte. M.G . Brazil. . , ' 
. - I S91 
592 L. G. D. HENEINE and D. CA ITY 
however, that Bothrops moojeni was the prevailing cause of snakebite (88%), with a lower 
prevalence of B. a/lernatus (9.5%) and B.jararaca (1.5%), in the northern part of the same 
state. The identification of species-specific epitopes of antigens is the first step towards 
providing the tools for the accurate diagnosis of specific venoms in the blood of patients 
and for epidemiological and clinical studies of evenoming in the community, and also for 
studies of the geographic distribution and phylogenetic relationship of snakes. We have 
reported previously (HENEINE et al., 1990) the identification of species-specific antigens 
from some Brazilian bothropic species. In the present study we report on species-specific 
venom detection by ELISA, and the identification of species-specific antigens by immuno-
blots of Brazilian snake venoms of the Bothrops and Lachesis genera. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Venoms 
The venoms of Bothrops species (B.jararaca. B.jararacussu. B. allernatus. B. atrox. B. moojeni and 
B. neuwied,), of Crotalus species, (C. durissus terrificus and C. durissus col/ineatus) and lAchesis muta were 
provided by Fundacao Ezequiel Dias, Belo Horizonte, M. G., Brazil. Venom from B. cotiara was a gift from Dr 
I. F. HENEINE (Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, M. G., Brazil). Venoms of each species 
were constituted from a pool of donor snakes and represent therefore the best approach to being representative 
of venom constituents of the species as a whole. 
Antivenoms 
Monovalent rabbit anti-Bothrops (B.jararaca. B.jararacussu. B. a/ternatus. B. atrox. B. moojeni. B. neuwiedi 
and B. cotiara), and L. muta antivenoms and monovalent rabbit antivenoms conjugated to alkaline phosphatase 
were supplied by Dr R. D. G. THEAKSTON (Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, U.K.). 
Venom adsorbents 
Glutaraldehyde insolubilization was performed following the method of TERNYCK and AVRAMEAS (1976). 
Batches of various absorbing venoms (a total of 20 mg in each case) were mixed in glass containers prior to 
insolubilization. The proportion of venoms to be added was derived from a cross-reactivity index calculated 
from previous ELISA tests (results not shown) .. For the B.jararaca-specific adsorbent we used: Bothrops 
(B.jararacussu. 1.34 mg; B. alternatus. 3.2 mg; B. atrox. 3.8 mg; B. moojeni. 3.4 mg; B. neuwiedi. 3.28 mg; 
B. cotiara. 3.2 mg); L. muta. 1.34 mg, and C. d. collineatus. 0.48 mg. making a total of 20 mg. The same 
methodology was applied to the other adsorbents. 
Antivenom absorption . 
Two millilitres of each antivenom was diluted with I ml of 0.1 M PBS. pH 7.4. and added to its respective 
adsorbent not containing the homologous venom. All were rotated for 2 hr at room temperature. centrifuged at 
3000, for 40 min, and the supernatant recovered. After a second absorption the supernatants were tested for 
specificity by ELISA. Repeat absorptions were performed depending on individual results. The adsorbents were 
washed between absorptions with 0.1 M glycine-HCI, pH 2.5, until the 280 nm optical density of the super-
natants was below 0.05. The pH was raised with I M K~PO .. and PBS was used to re-equilibrate the adsorbent. 
The supernatants were filtered through Millipore filters (0.45 pm) after each absorption step. . 
Immunoglobulin purification . 
This was carried out by anion-exchange as described by HARLOW (1988). Briefly, the antivenoms, after 
absorption to remove cross-reacting antibodies to other venom species, were dialysed overnight against three 
changes of 0.02 M phosphate buffer. pH 7.2. Antivenom (1.2 ml of each) was then added to plastic test tubes 
containing 2 ml of DEAE-Sepharose (Pharmacia LKB) equilibrated in the same buffer and rotated for 2 hr at 
room temperature. The tubes were then centrifuged for 30 min at 3000 g at 4C. The supernatant containing the 
purified immunoglobulin (mainly JgG) was taken off and the protein concentration calculated by optical density 
at 280 nm. using 
L~~m1 .. I.3S. 
Venom Antigens from Bothrops and Lachesis 593 
The purity was checked by acetate cellulose electrophoresis in 0.05 M barbital buffer, pH 8.6, on prepacked 
agarose gel plates (Coming Ltd). Traces of albumin were visible in all samples. The protein concentration was 
assumed to be only IgG-derived. 
Species-specific venom detection 
Antibody-capture and antigen-capture ELISA systems were used. 
Antibody-capture ELISA. The assay was carried out essentially as described by THEAKSTON et al. (1977): 96-
well ELISA plates (Nunc Maxisorb F96, A/S NUNC, Denmark), were coated with whole snake venoms at 
I Jlg/ml, 100 pi/well. The plates were then washed three times with 0.1 M phosphate buffered saline (PBS), 
pH 7.4, containing 0.05% of Tween-20. The absorbed antivenoms (100 pi/well) were added to the plates and 
incubated for I hr at 37C. After washing again, sheep IgG anti-rabbit IgG conjugated to horseradish 
peroxidase, diluted I: 20,000 in PBS-Tween 0.05%, was added. Following incubation and a washing step, the 
substrate solution ortho-phenylenediamine (OPD), 40 mg/IOO ml, with 20 pi of 30% (v/v) hydrogen peroxide, in 
citrate buffer pH 5, was added at 100 pl/well. The reaction was stopped with 20% (v/v) sulphuric acid, 50 pI/well, 
after 30 min incubation in the dark at 37C. The optical density at 492 nm was measured in an ELISA reader 
(Titertek Multiscan, Flow Labs). 
Antigen-capture ELISA. Affinity-absorbed antivenoms, as JgG fractions, at 40 Jlg/ml, were coated overnight 
onto microtitre plates. After blocking with 5% (w/v) low fat milk (1. Sainsbury pic) in coating buffer, different 
venom preparations, in concentrations ranging from 0.01-10 pg/ml, were added either in incubation buffer or in 
I : 50 diluted normal human serum. After incubation and washing steps, non-absorbed monovalent rabbit 
antivenoms as IgG fractions, conjugated to alkaline phosphatase, were added in two dilutions (I : 50 or I: 500) 
to the wells coated with the homologous absorbed antivenom IgG and 'captured' venom antigen. The substrate, 
p-nitrophenyl phosphate (SIGMA Chemical Co.). in 10 mM diethanolamine (pH 9.5) containing 0.5 mM MgCll 
in the presence of 30% (v/v) hydrogen peroxide was added, and the plate incubated at 37C. The optical density 
was determined at 405 nm without stopping the reaction. All incubation and washing steps were as described 
above for the antibody-capture assay. All volumes were 50 pi/well. 
Gel electrophoresis 
This was performed in a non-reducing SDS/PAGE, discontinuous buffer system (LAEMMLJ, 1970). Twenty-five 
micrograms of each venom in sample buffer was applied in a volume of 2.5 pi to a 10% acrylamide gel (slab). 
The gels were run at a constant current of 20 rnA/gel for 1.5 hr on a Midget Electrophoresis Unit (Pharmacia 
LKB). Prestained standard solution of MW-SDS-7-B were used as mo\. wt markers (Sigma Chemical Co.) 
Immunoblolting 
Western blotting procedures used were similar to that reported by HENEINE el 01. (1990). Venom samples 
separated on 10% polyacrylamide gel were transferred to nitrocellulose paper using 20 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine 
and 20% methanol (TOWBIN el 01.,1979) at 0.45 A for 60 min using a Bio-Rad Trans-blot electrophoresis cell. 
Absorbed antivenom IgGs against B.jararaca and B. alternalus were used at I: 800 dilution; absorbed 
anti-B.jararacussu IgG was used at I : 600. Non-absorbed monovalent antivenoms were used at I : 2000 dilution. 
RESULTS 
Venom adsorbents 
The glutaraldehyde method of protein insolubilization proved to be reliable and met the 
requirements. Large amounts of protein can be insolubilized, yielding a relatively small 
volume of adsorbent. 
Antivenom absorption 
The absorption of cross-reacting antibodies of monovalent antivenoms on venom 
adsorbents yielded absorbed reagents with species-specificity. The number of absorptions 
needed to produce species-specific antivenoms varied between the samples studie~. Some 
antivenoms required only two absorption steps, and some had to be absorbed three to 
four times. Some batches of antivenom required further absorptions on adsorbents 
594 L. G . D. li E I N and D . CATTY 
2 3 4 5 6 8 9 
FIG. I . R I.ACTIVITY Or' AIISOI( IIU) ANTI VENOMS AGAINST HOMOLOGOUS AND HITI I(OLOGOLS Vl, 'OMS. 
T he ELI /I pla le was coa led wllh venom Solulions a l Illg"nl , 100 Iii well. Absorbed an livenoms 
were added al differenl di lulions: A , anti-B.jururaca, I : 100: B, anti-B.jararacussu. I : 100, C. 
anl i-B. llloojell i. I : 200; D, a nli -B. llell l1'ieili. I : 200; E. anli-L. mula. I : 200. Venoms are coa ted as: 
2, B. jararuca: 3. B. jararaclIsslI: 4, B. allemallls: 5, B. alrox; 6, B.llloo}elli: 7. B. llelll1'iedi; 8, 
B. lOliara: 9, L. lII l11a; 10, Crolailis dllri.lSlIs lerrificlIs: II, Crolaills dllrls.ws cal/illcallls. olumn I, 
buner alone: ol umn 12, venom + conjugate. Conjugate, sheep an i i-rabbit IgG II R P. used at 
I : 20.000, 100 pi well. 
conta ining a single cross-reac ting venom in o rder to increase species-specificity. The batch 
procedure fo r the a bso rption was chosen in order to avo id exce ive diluti on of the 
a nti venom with the need then fo r sub eq uent concentration which might have produced a 
10 s o f a nti body acti vity. The fi ltra tio n o f the superna tant wa importa nt in removing a ny 
sma ll support ma tri x pa rticles conta in ing cross- react ing bound a ntibodies . The e co uld 
interfere with pro tein qua ntita tion a nd with the pecificity assays. 
A hsorhed anI ivellom species-specijicil y 
he a ntibody ca pture assay was used to asse whether the a bso rpti on process for 
remova l o f c ros. -reacting a ntibodie. on venom a bsorbent wa producing species-specific 
reagent , and to te t the reproducibility o f the a bsorption me thod . In ig. I , a ingle 
Venom Antigens from Bothrops and Lachesis 595 
TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF THE REACTIVITY (AS PERCENTAGE OF THE 00 READING) BETWEEN THE SPECIES-SPECIFIC 
ABSORBED ANTIVENOMS AND THE HOMOLOGOUS AND HETEROLOGOUS VENOMS 
Venoms 
Antivenoms 
against JAR JSU ALT ATR MOJ NEU COT MUT 
B. jar 100% 29 (14) 50 (5) 50 (7.5) 38 (2) 30 (2) 50 (3.5) 21 (5.8) 
B. jsu 20 (5.5) 100% 12 (2) 14 (1.6) 47 (3) 30 (3) I 18 
B. atr SO (3.5) 38 (8) 54 (2) 100% 50 (7) > 50 (14) SO (20) 24 (14) 
B. moj 19 (1.7) 25 (8) 9 (2) 20 (3) 100% 41 (13) 11 (I) 8 (1.8) 
B. neu 17 (4) 10 (4) 16 (3) 3.8 6.8 (I) 100% 6 8 (2) 
L. mut 16 (9) 30 (5) 14 1.6 1.8 30 (IS) IS (5) 100% 
Homologous reaction is 100%. Numbers in brackets are standard deviation of two experiments. Antivenoms: 
B. jar, anti-B. jararaca; B. jsu, anti-B. jararacussu; B. atr, anti-B. atrox; B. moj, anti-B. moojeni; B. neu, 
anti-B. neuwiedi; L. mut, anti-L. muta. Venoms: JAR. B.jararaca; JSU, B.jararacussu; ALT, B. alternatus; 
ATR, B. atrox; MOJ, B. moojeni; NEU, B. neuwiedi; COT, B. cotiara; MUT, L. muta. 
dilution of absorbed antivenom was reacted with the different venoms studied. The 
absorbed anti-Bothrops moojeni (C), anti-Bothrops neuwiedi (D) and anti-Lachesis muta 
(E) show almost complete species-specificity. Anti-Bothrops jararaca (A) and anti-Both-
rops jararacussu (B) show substantial but not complete species-specificity. To test the 
reproducibility of the absorption technique, two different batches of the anti venoms were 
then absorbed four times each on different occasions. These were added to ELISA plates 
coated with the different venoms in the same coating concentration, I Jlg/ml, 100 Jll/well. 
Table I show these results expressed as the mean percentage difference in OD reading 
between the homologous and heterologous reaction where the homologous reaction is set 
at 100%. All absorbed antivenoms retained high reactivity towards the homologous 
venom. The smallest difference between homologous and heterologous reaction of the 
absorbed antivenom is 46%. The standard deviation of the replicate experiments for each 
test is shown in brackets. 
Antigen and antibody capture ELISA tests show that the species-specificity was 
maintained throughout a range of venom concentrations (Figs 2 and 3). In the antibody 
capture assay (Fig. 2), anti-B.jararaca (Fig.2A), anti-B.jararacussu (Fig.2B), and 
anti-B. neuwiedi (Fig. 2E) gave homologous reactions which are at least two times greater 
(by OD reading) than the heterologous ones, throughout the range of venom concentra-
tions used (0.1-10 Jlg/ml). Anti-B. alternatus (Fig.2C) showed a more significant cross-
reaction against B. cotiara venom, as also did anti-B. moojeni against B. neuwiedi venom 
(Fig. 2D). Similar results were observed with the antigen-capture assay (Fig. 3), using the 
absorbed IgG preparations as the coating layer. The alkaline phosphatase conjugates used 
were from rabbit monovalent anti venom sera, which were unabsorbed. Figure 4 shows the 
homologous reaction of the absorbed anti-B. atrox antivenom, and that against L. muta 
venom (Fig.4A), and vice versa (Fig.4B); in both cases the species-specific reaction 
observed is independent of venom and anti venom concentration. 
Specific venom detection in human serum 
The sensitivity of the specific detection of the different venoms was tested. Venoms 
added to normal human serum previously diluted to 1: 50 were assayed by antigen 
capture ELISA using the absorbed antibody IgG fractions as the coating antigen-capture 
E 0.8 c: 
Ol  0.6 .. 
0.4 ''::; 
Co ... 
0.2 .0 
E 1.0 
Ol 0.8  .. 
c: 0.6 
'a 5 0.4 
c( 0.2 
1.5 N 
Ol .' .. 10 
c: 1.0 0 
''::; 
en 0.5 .0 
L.G. D. HENEINE and D. CATTY 
0.01 0.1 10 
0.01 0.1 1 10 
:: ;d1=4 
0.01 0.1 10 
1.6 0 
c: 1.2 
Ol  .. 
c: 0.8 
''::; ------Co ... /"'-0 0.4 (/) 
1= t sf :1 c( 
0.01 0.1 10 
2.0 E. 
~ 1.5 
c: 1.0 
5l 0.5 
o.oL~~~~-
0.Q1 0.1 1 10 
o B. jararaca 
 B. jararacussu 
v B. alternatus 
T B. atrox , 
c B. moojeni 
- B. neuwiedi 
A B. cotiara 
A L. muta 
<> C. d. terricus 
 C. d. collineatus 
FIG. 2. ELISA REACTIVITY OF ABSORBED ANTIVENOMS AGAINST INCREASING CONCENTRATIONS OF 
HOMOLOGOUS AND HETEROLOGOUS VENOMS. 
Different venom solutions were coated onto different wells. Absorbed antivenoms were separately 
added to wells containing homologous and heterologous venom. A. Anti-B.jararaca. at 1: 100 
dilution (dil.); B. anti-B.jararacussu. 1: 100 dil.; C, anti-B. alternatus, 1: 100 dil.; D, 
anti-B. moojeni. 1: 200 dil.; E. anti-B. neuwiedi. 1: 200 dil. Coating venoms are as shown in the 
key. Conjugate used as in Fig. 1. 
Venom Antigens from Bo/hrops and Lachesis 
> 0.20 
~ 0.15 ' ...,. 
:5 0.10 
~ 0.05 
,:,r,r' 
~ 0.00 L-.j;::~~r.-:::: __ -
0.01 0.1 1 10 
Venom Cone. (/J-9/ml) 
, ,:" \ 
, E .. 0.3 /. 
r-V't 0 ...,. 0.2 ... 
.. ~. 
a: 0.1 ... 
.&J , . 0.0 
0.01 0.1 10 
Venom Cone. (~gJml) 
0.5 C 
Ji ' 0.4 
'0 ...,. ... ' 0.3 I 
0.2 ~' -a ... 
0.1 UI 
0.01 0.1 1 10 
Venom Cone. (/J-9/ml) 
0.5 0 
~ 0.4 
'iii 0.3 
o 0.2 
~ 0.1 " 
0.01 0.1 1 "10 
Venom Cone. (/J-g/ml) 
0.25 E 
Ji 0.20 
o ...,. 
'iii 0.15 
.g 0.10 
~ 0.05 
Venoms 
o B. jararaea 
 B. jararaeussu 
V B. alternatus ' 
D B. moojeni 
 B. neuwiedi 
t. B. eotiara 
FIG. 3. ANTIGEN-CAPTURE ASSAY (ELISA) OF HOMOLOGOUS AND HETEROLOGOUS VENOM. 
Absorbed antivenom JgGs, were coated onto ELISA plates at 40 pg/ml. Different venom solutions 
were added to different wells containing the homologous and heterologous antivenom JgG. 
Unabsorbed monovalent rabbit antivenom-IgG, conjugated to alkaline phosphatase, was added to 
wells coated with the homologous antivenom-IgG at 1 : 500. Antivenoms; A, anti-B.jararaca; B. 
anti-B.jararacussu; C, anti-B. moojeni; D, anti-B. a/lerna/us; E. anti-B. neuwiedi. The error bars 
represent the standard deviation of two assays. 
layer. Normal human serum was used as a negative control. Figure 5 shows the capacity 
of coating antibodies to detect homologous venoms diluted in serum across a range of 
concentrations. Sensitivity for three venoms is about 0.01 ",g of venomlml of serum or less 
and for B.jararaca venom about 0.1 ",g/mI. The species-specificity of the system was also 
tested using a single concentration of the homologous and heterologous venoms (1 ",g/ml) 
added to the panel of coating absorbed antivenom antibodies. Figure 6 shows the results 
598 L. G. D. HENEINE and D. CA lTV 
2.0 A 
E 2.0 B /;A,/1 
~ 1.5 ~ 
~ 1:100,' 
~ ---1:200 " 
g 1.0 A-A,' 
.~ ~" 
~ 0.5 A'" 
E "'---'" 
~ / en 1.5 
~ 1:100'" ,,"'---'f 
~ ---1:200" 
o 1.0 _, 
. " .. 
'e- " 2 ",' ~ 
 0.5 ,,/ ..A 
~ ~"',A 
A--~-"""'" 0.0 L..--.J.._-'--l_-l-.._ 
0.01 0.1 10 
Venom Cone. (II-g/ml) Venom Cone. (II-g/ml) 
Flo. 4. REACTIVITY OF ABSORBED ANTI-B. atrox (A) AND ANTI-L. muta (B) AGAINST HOMOLOGOUS 
AND HETEROLOGOUS VENOMS BY ANTIBODY-CAPTURE ELISA. 
Different venom solutions were coated into different wells at 100 pi/well. Absorbed antivenorns to 
L. muta and B. atrox venoms were separately added to different wells containing the homologous 
and heterologous venoms. A, Absorbed anti-B. atrox at I: 100 and I: 200 dil. B, Absorbed 
anti-L. muta at I : 100 and I : 200 dil. Venoms: B. atrox 'Y; L muta .A.. 
for four coating antibody specificities. These show that the species-specific detection of the 
homologous venom was almost complete. Absorbed anti-B. a/ternatus (Fig.6C) showed 
only a significant degree of residual cross-reaction to the B. cotiara venom and the 
absorbed anti-B. neuwiedi (Fig. 60) to the venom of B.jararaca. 
Detection of species-specific venom antigens 
Absorbed antivenoms, which by ELISA had shown good species-specificity, were used 
on a cross-panel analysis of venoms, to investigate the existence of species-specific venom 
components. Replicate nitrocellulose membranes with the separated venom components 
o B. jararaea 0.80~ 
E 0.70  B. jararaeussu _ 
8 0.60 v B. alternatus ~ 
.,. 0.50 '" B. neuwiedi 
g 0.40 1/-
.~ 0.30 '1/;'" 
1: 0.20 ./ / 
 0.10 %'" 
Flo. 5. ANTIGEN-CAPTURE (ELISA) TO DETECT HOMOLOGOUS VENOM ADDED TO NORMAL HUMAN 
SERUM DILUTED TO I : SO. 
Absorbed antivenoms (JgG fractions) were coated onto microtitre plates at 40 pg/ml. Different 
venom concentrations (0.01 to 10.0 pg/ml) in serum were added to different wells containing the 
homologous absorbed antibody. Non-absorbed rabbit antivenoms (IgG fractions), conjugated to 
alkaline phosphatase, was used at a I : 50 dilution. Results are the mean of three experiments. 
Venom Antigens from Bothrops and Lachesis 
100 100 
75 75 
'of. 50 'of. 50 
25 25 
Venoms Venoms 
100 100 
75 75 
'of. 50 ~ 50 
25 25 
JAR ALT 
NEU NEU 
JSU MOJ COT MOJ COT 
Venoms Venoms 
FIG. 6 SPECIES-SPECIFIC DETECTION OF SNAKE VENOMS IN HUMAN SERUM BY ANTIGEN-CAPTURE ELISA. 
Absorbed antivenoms (fgG fractions) were coated onto plates at 40 Ilg/ml and reacted with a single 
concentration (Illg/ml) of homologous and heterologous venoms added to normal human serum 
diluted at 1: SO. A, anti-B.jararaca; B, anti-B.jararacussu; C, anti-B. alternatus; 0, 
anti-B. neuwiedi. Alkaline phosphatase conjugates were used at 1: 100 dil. Volumes were of 
SO Ill/well. Venoms: JAR, B.jararaca; JSU, B.jararacussu; ALT, B. alternatus; MOJ, B. moojeni; 
NEU, B. neuwiedi; COT, B. cotiara. Results are expressed as percentage of optical density readings 
with the homologous reaction set at \00%. 
were reacted against homologous and heterologous absorbed anti venoms, with unab-
sorbed antivenom as the control. Figure 7 shows the pattern of venom components 
revealed by the reaction of the absorbed anti-B.jararaca and .its homologous and 
heterologous venoms. The absorbed anti-B.jararaca revealed two species-specific bands, 
one at the range of 14,000-20,000 mol. wt and the second at the range of 48,000-64,000. 
Absorbed anti-B.jararacussu, Fig. 8, stained two specific bands at the range of 84,000-
110,000. However, a strong cross-reacting band is seen with the B. neuwiedi venom above 
120,000. Figure 9 shows the species-specific bands revealed by the absorbed 
anti-B. a/lernatus. There is one band at the range of 20,000-24,000, three at 36,000-
45,000, one at 64,000-90,000 and two around 119,000. In general, absorbed antivenoms 
stained a variable number of species-specific antigen bands of widely different mol. wt. 
ranging from 20,000 to 120,000. 
HMW 1 2 
L. G. D. HE EINE and D. CATTY 
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 c LMW 
FIG. 7. VENOM ANTIGENS SJ.PARATED BY SDSjPAGE UNDER NON-REDUCING CONDITIONS WERf 
STAIN:D BY ABSORBED ANTI-B. jararaca IgG . 
Venoms: (I) B.jararaclJ; (2) B.jararaclIs.w; (3) B. a/lematlls; (4) B. alrO_\; (5) B.llloajelli; (6) 
B. l1ellll'iedi; (7) B. c()liara; (8) L.lllula; (9) C. d. lerrificlIs. C: control, B.}araraca venom stained by 
non-absorbed anti -B.}ari/raca. HMW and LMW. high and low mol. wt marker _ respectively. 
DIS USSION 
Using the venom absorption technique, monovalent anti venom sera were totally or 
partially depleted of cross-reacting a ntibodies towards other venoms in the panel studied. 
For some anti venoms the specie -specific reactivity was rendered ab olute or was greatly 
increased. In consequence it is possible to identify individual venom components that 
could be useful in the specific identification of species of snake venoms. Different batches 
of ant ivenoms of the same specificity required different numbers of absorption steps to 
achieve species- pecificity. Al 0, the cross-reactivity wa not abolished at the same rate for 
LMW c 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 1 2 HMW 
FIG. 8. VENOM ANTIGENS SEPARATED BY SDSjPAGE NDER NON-REDUCING CONDITIONS WERE 
STAINE)) BY ABSORBED ANTI-B.jararaclIssli IgG. 
Venoms: ( I) B.jararaca; (2) B.jararaclisslI; (3) B. a/lemalus; (4) B. atrox; (5) B. moojeni; (6) 
B. Ilellll'iedi; (7) B. cOliara; (8) L. milIa; (9) C. d. lerrificus. : control, B.}araracussli venom tained 
by non-absorbed anli-B.jararaclIsSIi. HMW and LMW. high and low mol. wt markers, 
respectively. 
HMW 3 
Venom Antigens rrom Bo/llmps and Lachesis 
1 2 4 5 6 7 8 9 C LMW 
----------~--~~~ 
FIG. 9. VENOM A TIGENS SEPARATED IlY SDS/PAGE NDER NON- REDUCING CONDITIONS WERE 
STA INED BY ABSORBED ANTI - B . al/emflllls IgG. 
Venoms: (I) B.jarllraca; (2) B.jararaclIssu; (3) B. al/emall/s; (4) B. a/rox; (5) B. mooieni; (6) 
B. /l el/lViedi; (7) B. co /iara ; (8) L. lilli/a ; (9) C. d. /errifiCliS. C: con trol , B. al/ernclIlIs venom stained 
by non-absorbed anti-B. al/emall/s. HMW and LMW, high and low mol. wt markers. respectively. 
all the heterologolls venoms. For example, after one or two absorption steps absorbed 
anti-B.jararaclIssu antivenom retained significant cros -reactivity mainly towards the 
B. moojeni and B. net/wiedi venoms. Anti -B. moojeni would behave similarly towards 
B. neuwiedi, and not against B.jararacussu. A possible explanation could be that some 
venoms contain higher co ncentra tions of the cross-reacting component(s) than other 
venoms, thus eliciting an antivenom with higher concentration of cross-reacting anti-
bodies which would make it more difficult to absorb out with the heterologous venom, 
carrying a lower concentration of the antigen. More absorption steps would be required to 
further deplete the remaining cross-reacting antibodies in such cases. Also, pos ibly, the 
binding of the antivenom onto a venom's cross-reacting component(s), present in the 
adsorbent, wa not a effici ent as in the reverse ituation due to differences in affinity, or 
the antigen(s) may not have been bound to the adsorbent in the appropriate proportion(s). 
Antigenic cro s- reactivity of the Bothrops venoms has been previously reported . 
SILLES-VILLARROEL el al. (1974), using immunoelectrophoresis and agarose gel double 
diffusion techniques, reported extensive cross-reactivity between the venom of B.jararaca, 
and tho c of other Bo/hrops p. (B. allerna/us, B. moojeni , B. insu/ares , B. cO liara) . There 
was less cross- reactivity with B.jararacussu venom. DIAS DA SILVA e / 01. (1989), lIsing 
ELISA and other techniques to study cross-reactivity of ten bothropic venom, found 
si milar re ults. The absorbed antivenoms tudied here were able to detect specifically the 
homologo us venom in a co ncentration range of 0.01 - 10 /lg/ml by ELISA. There are no 
data on the level of venom concentration derived from Brazilian pit vipers in the sera of 
envenomed human . Ho ef 01. (1986) reported levels of 0- 600 ng/ml of venom from the 
Malayan pit viper ( alloselasma rhodostoma) in the plasma of envenomed patients. 
MINTON (1987) reports venom levels of I- IOO/lg/ml of blood for American pit vipers in 
envenomed patients. Lower concentrations were not tested here but the sensitivity of the 
te t ma y be improved by utilising both affinity-purified antibody preparations and enzyme 
amplification sy tem available for example with avidin/biotin conjugates. Previous 
attempts to develop a sensitive and rapid diagnostic te t, and this includes Brazilian 
venoms, have not been uccessful (MINTON, 1987; THEAKSTON, 1989). LABROUSSE ef 01. 
602 L. G. D. HENEINE and D. CArrY 
(1988) reported a sensitive ELISA test for measuring low levels of Vipera ammodytes (less 
than I ng/ml of blood) in assays performed in less than 20 min, but cross-reactivity of the 
monovalent antiserum used would have rendered the assay unsuitable for clinical diag-
nosis. Our results for the detection of B.jararaca venom compare most favourably for 
specificity with those described by BARRAL-NETo et al. (1990). However, their ELISA for 
detection of B.jararaca venom detected equally most of the other Bothrops venoms and in 
particular B. alrox venom. 
Lachesis mula and BOlhrops alrox were studied separately by virtue of their overlapping 
geographic distribution, mainly in the northern region of Brazil (HOGE and 
ROMANo-HOGE, 1978/79). In these locations they are responsible for the majority of 
snakebites involving systemic envenoming. Bothrops atrox is the major species involved in 
ophidic accidents in the region. 
Immunoblotting was used to identify venom species-specific components. Blots were 
carried out in non-reducing conditions. The absorbed antivenoms revealed different 
patterns of specific components when reacted with their homologous venoms. Some of 
these results are in accordance with those presented previously by us (HENEINE et al., 
1990). Absorbed antivenom-IgG anti-B.jararaca, anti-B.jararacussu and anti-
B. a/lerna Ius revealed species-specific stained bands with the homologous venom. MOURA 
DA SILVA et al. (1990), investigating the antigenic cross-reactivity of bothropic venoms, 
reported no species-specific antigens recognised by the homologous antivenom,' and 
argued that the region of above 30,000 mol. wt contained the venom antigens mainly 
responsible for the cross-reactivities. Those results differ from ours; our absorbed anti-
venoms recognised species-specific venom components on the immunoblots with mol. wt 
greater than 30,000. 
Our results show the possibility of detecting species-specific snake venom antigens from 
bothropic and lachetic snakes. In the cases where a more significant cross-reaction is still 
present after absorption, we recognise that it may not be possible to achieve complete 
specificity in a polyclonal system, operating at a level offering sensitive immunoassays. 
The adoption of monoclonal antibody methods may in these circumstances be, the only 
way forward. In any event the ability to define species-specific venom antigens and to 
prepare substantially species-specific polyclonal reagents is a major aid in the steps to 
production of useful monoclonal antibodies. 
The results here reported could be of importance in the development of snakebite 
diagnostic assays and in the study of the epidemiology of snake accidents and the 
phylogeny of closely related snake species. 
Acknowledgements - The expert and dedicated help of Mrs CHANDRA RA YKUNDALIA is greatly acknowledged by 
the authors. Thanks also to the student CARLOS NERY TRIGO-TRIGO for his help in the ELISA assays during his 
training period in our laboratory. Our special gratitude goes to Dr R. D. G. THEAKSTON for the supplies of the 
monovalent rabbit antivenoms and alkaline phophatase conjugates. This work was performed in the WHO 
Collaborating Centre for Production and Quality Control of Immunological Reagents at the University of 
Birmingham. One of us (L. G. D. H.) is the recipient of a CNPq doctoral fellowship, on leave from Funda~ao 
Ezequiel Dias, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil. 
REFERENCES 
BARRAL-NETO, M., SCHRIEFER, A., VINHAS, V. and ALMEIDA, A. R. (1990) Enzyme-linked immunoassay for'the 
detection of BOlhropsjararaca venom. Toxicon 28,1053-1061. 
CARDOSO, I. L. C. and BRANDO, R. B. (1982) Ac;dentes por an;ma;s peronhentos: Clinica e tratamento. Sao Paulo: 
Livraria e Editora Santos. 
Venom Antigens from Bothrops and Lachesis 603 
DIAS DA SILVA, W. G. R., RAw, I., HIGASHI, H. G., MORAIS, I. F., liMA, M. R. S. R., YAMAGUCHI, I. K., 
NISHIKAWA, A. K., STEHPHAN, A. M., MARCELINO, J. R., PINTO, J. R. and SANTOS, M. J. (1989) 
Cross-reactivity of horse monovalent antivenoms to venoms of ten Bothrops species. Mem. Inst. Butantan SI, 
153-168. 
HARLOW, D. L. (1988) In: Antibodies: a Laboratory Manual. p. 302 (HARLOW, D. L., Ed.). Cold Spring Harbor 
Laboratory. 
HENEINE, L. G. D., CATTY, D. and THEAKSTON, R. D. G. (1990) Development of a species-specific ELISA for 
Brazilian pit viper venoms. Braz. J. bioi. med. Sci. 23, 585-588. 
Ho, M., WARRELL, D. A., LooAREESUWAN, S., PHILLIPS, R. E., CHANTHAVANICH, P., KARBWANG, J., 
SUPANARNOND, W., VIRAVAN, C., HUTTON, R. A. and VEJCHO, S. (1986) Qinical significance of venom antigen 
levels in patients envenomed by the Malayan pit viper (Calloselasma rhodostoma). Am. J. trop. Med. Hyg. 3S, 
579-587. 
HooE, A. R. and ROMANo-HooE, S. A. W. R. L. (1978/79) Sinopse das Serpentes P~onhentas do Brasil 2 Ed. 
Mem. Inst. Butantan 42/43, 373--496. 
KOUYOUMDJIAN, J. A. and POLIZELLI, C. (1988) Acidentes ofidicos causados por Bothrops moojeni: relato de 37 
casos. Revist. Med. trop. sao Paulo JO, 424--432. 
LABRoussE, H., NISHIKAWA, A. K., BON, C. and AVRAMAES, S. (1988) Development of a rapid and sensitive 
enzyme-Iynked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for measuring venom antigens after an experimental snake 
bite. Toxicon 26, 1157-1167. 
LAEMMLI, U. K. (1970) Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. 
Nature. Lond. 227,680-685. 
MINISTERIO DA SAUDE DO BRASIL (1986) Report of the "n Reuniiio tecnica sobre ofidismo: distribui~iio 
geografica das serpentes do Brasil". (Brasilia). 
MINTON, S. A. (1987) Present tests for detection of snake venom: clinical applications. Ann. emerg. Med. 16, 
932-937. 
MOURA DA SILVA, A. M., D'IMPERIO LIMA, M. R., NISHIKAWA, A. K., BRODSKYN, C. I., SANTOS, M. C., 
FURTADO, M. F. D., DIAS DA SILVA, W. and MOTA, I. (1990) Antigenic cross-reactivity of venoms obtained 
from snakes of genus Bothrops. Toxicon 28, 181-188. 
NELSON, B. K. (1989) Snake envenomation: incidence, clinical presentation and management. Med. Toxicol.4, 
17-31. 
SILES-VILLARROEL, M., FURLANETTO, R. S., ROSA, R., ZELANTE, F. and NAVAS, J. (1974) Contribui~iio ao estudo 
imunoquimico de venenos botropicos. Mem. Inst. Butantan 38, 31--40. 
TERNYCK, T. and AVRAMEAS, S. (1976) Polymerization and immobilization of proteins using ethylchloroformate 
and glutaraldehyde. Scand. J. Immun. 3, 29-35. 
THEAKSTON, R. D. G. (1989) Snake venoms in science and clinical medicine 2. Applied immunology in snake 
venom research. Trans. R. Soc. trop. Med. Hyg. 83, 741-744. 
THEAKSTON, R. D. G., LLOYD-JONES, M. J. and REID, H. A. (1977) Microelisa for detecting and assaying snake 
venom and venom antibody. Lancet ii, 639-641. 
TOWBIN, H., STAEHELlN, T. and GORDON, J. (1979) Electrophoretic transfer of proteins from polyacrylamide gels 
to nitrocellulose sheets: procedure and some applications. Proc. natn. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 76, 4350--4354. 
BrariJian J Med Bioi Res (l990) 23: 585-588 SHORTCOMMUMCATION 
DEVELOPMENT OF A SPECIES-SPECIFIC ELISA FOR BRAZILIAN 
PIT-VIPER VENOMS 
L.G.D. HENEINE. D. CATTY and R.D.G. THEAKSTON* 
Department of Immunology. Division for the Study of Infectious Diseases. 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B 15 2IT. England 
 LIverpool School of Tropical Medicine. LIverpool LJ 5QA. England , 
Antigenic cross-reactivity between venoms of the genus Bothrops has been shown to be an 
extensive problem. However:some venom components are species-specific. In this study we have produced 
species-specific antivenotns against some members of the genus Bothrops. Monospecific rabbit antivenoms 
(IgG) were absorbed on venom affInity adsorbents. The species-specificity was tested by ELISA assays and 
immunoblots. The results of both assays showed complete species-specificity in some cases and highly 
increased species-specificity in others.' These reagents can be used to determine the envenomating species in 
snake bite patients as an aid to improved serotherapy~' " 
Key words: Bothrops venoms. species-specific antivenotns. 
, , , 
, The majority of snake bite accidents in Brazil are caused by the genus Bothrops 
(1-3) which comprises a large number of species living in overlapping areas of the country 
(4). The pool of venoms used for the production of a polyvalent antivenom does not contain 
all venoms of the genus. The efficacy of these sera in treatment of patients envenomated by 
species not included in the pool has been questioned (2). The epidemiological data about 
snake bite accidents in South America are poor (5). A specific and reliable method for snake 
venom identification from the blood of victims would be of great value by providing a more 
precise knowledge of the species involved in present and past envenomations. In the present 
study. venoms from B.'jararaca. B. jararacussu. B. altematus. B. wox. B. mOojeni, B. 
neuwiedi. B. codara, Crotalus durissus lerrijicus. C. durissus collineatus and Lachesis mula 
were used. together with their homologous rabbit antisera, or IgG fractions of these. 
Glutaraldehyde adsorbents were prepared (6). each containing only nine of the ten venoms 
above (0.5 mg per venom). Antisera (or IgG), in volumes of 400 -LI, were added to the 
adsorbents not containing the homologous venom. The mixtures were rotated for 2 h at room 
temperature and then centrifuged at 4000 g for 30 min,' at 40 C. The 'supernatants were 
recovered for study as absorbed reagents. The adsorbents were washed 3 times with 0.1 M 
glycine-HCI buffer. pH 3.2. followed by repeated waShings with PBS until the pH reached 
To be presented at the V Annual Meeting of the Fede~lo de Sociedades de Biologia Experimental. 
Caxambu. MG. August 24-28.1990. - ' ', .:' ", ,", '  
L.G.D.H. is the recipient of a CNPq doctoral fellowship. on leave from Fun~io Ezequiel Dias. Belo 
Horizonte.MG.Brazil: _ . ," _ . ", ~ . , 
Correspondence: Dr. L.G.D. Heneine. Department of Immunology, Division for the Study of Infectious 
Diseases, University of Birmingham. Vincent Drive. Edgbaston, Birmingham, BIS 2TJ, England." I ; 
586 L.G.D. Heneine et al. 
7.2-7.4. After a second absorption step the supernatant solutions were stored at -200C. 
The decrease in the IgG content of the samples was measured by absorbance at 280 nm, 
E13 .5) mglml. The ELISA assay was done essentially as described by Theakston et aI. (7). 
ELISA plates (Nunc Immunosorb) were coated with all of the ten venoms in 1 j.Lg/ml 
solution using 100 j.Ll per well. The plates were incubated overnight at 40 C and washed. 
Dilutions of only one of the absorbed sera (or IgG fraction) , tOO j.Ll/well, were then added to 
each plate and the material was incubated for that 370 C. Horseradish peroxidase-conjugat-
ed anti-rabbit IgG was used at 1:20,000 dilution in PBS-Tween, 100 j.LlIwelI, and incubated 
for 1 hat 370 C. The substrate a-phenylenediamine was added in 0.1 M citric acid buffer, pH 
4.5, 100 j.LlIwell, and incubated for 30 min at 370 C. The reaction was stopped with 50 j.LI of 
20% (v/v) sulphuric acid and the optical density was read at 492 om. Figure 1 shows that the 
irnmunoabsorption of the anti-B. moojeni, -B. alternatus (IgG) and -B. jararacussu antisera 
yielded venom species-specific reagents while anti-B. neuwiedi IgG showed an increased 
degree of species-specificity against the panel of venoms. The statistical difference between 
reactions to homologous and heterologous venoms was calculated in all plates showing cross-
reactivity. Specific reactions were found to be significant at P<0.05. Polyacrylamide 
electrophoresis Of. venoms for the immunoblots was carried out under non-SDS and non-
on .. .. 
on .. 
: 0 .. 
Figure J - ELISA plates showing the reaction of the ten venoms against the absorbed antivenoms. A. 
Antivcnolll to B. jararacussu venom; B. antivenom to B. allematus venom; C. antivenom to B. nwojeni 
venom; D. antivenom to B. neuwiedi venom. Venoms are from the following snakes: I, B.jararaca; 2, B. 
jararacUSsu; 3. B. a/rox; 4. B. altematus; 5, B. nwojeni; 6. B. neuwiedi; 7. B. co tiara; 8, L. mula; 9. C.d. 
collinearu.r; 10. C.d. terrijicus. Antivcnom dilutions are shown on the left. Controls (Con) are 1. venom 
alone; J +3. venom plus conjugate. 
EUSA jor pit-viper venoms 587 
denaturing condjtions on a 7.5% gel, with a 3.0% stacking gel (8). Twenty-five fLg of each 
venom was loaded in a volume of 2.5 fLl and a current of 28 rnA was applied for 50 mID. The 
blots (9) were carried out over 50 mID at 36 mAo Nitrocellulose was blocked for 1 h with 
0.1 % PBS-Tween. The absorbed antisera (or IgG) were added in the same buffer at a 
dilution of 1: 1000 and the unabsorbed antisera were used as controls at a dilution of 1:2000. 
All incubation steps took I h at 370 C followed by 30-min washings with two changes of 
washing buffer. The substrate 3,3'-diamIDobenzidjne was added in 50 mM Tris buffer, pH 
7.4, with 30% H20 2. The reactions were developed until a satisfactory clear pattern was 
acrueved. Figure 2 shows the imrnunoblots for B. jararacussu, B. alternatus, B. moojeni and 
B. atrox venoms. Prestamed molecular weight markers (Sigma-MW-SDS Blue) were used 
for reference. The absorbed antisera (or IgG) were shown to be reactive to only some of the 
components of their homologous venoms when compared with the stailling pattern of the 
unabsorbed sera. The absorbed sera (or IgG) showed little or no cross-reactivity agamst the 
other venoms of the genus Bothrops. 
We have demonstrated for the first time that venom affillity absorption of 
anti-venom sera yields species-specific antibodies against the homologous snake venom 
A 3 2 4 5 6 
a 7 10. 
B 10 2 3 4 5 8 
(190) ( 180) 
(116) (116) 
( a..) 
(84) } 
(48,5) 
(48.5) 
(36.5 (36.5).= 
AI> AI> 
c: ~ I 2 3 5 6 7 8 9 4 D 5 I 2 3411 ~ 
( leo (180) 
( IHI) ( 116) 
(84) (84) 
(58) (58) 
(48,S) (48.5) 
{3e.5 (36.5) 
(26.6) (26.6) 
'--' lb "uii' 
AI> Un 
Figure 2 - lmmunoblots showing the reaction of the ten venoms against the absorbed and unabsorbed 
antivenorns. A, Antivenom to B. jararacussu venom; B, antivenom to B. atrox venom; C, anti venom to B. 
alternatus venom; D, anti venom to B. moojeni venom. Antivenoms are labelled as: Ab, Absorbed; Un, 
unabsorbed. Numbers in parentheses indicate positions of the molecular weight markers x 103 daltons. 
Venoms are labelled as in Figure I and are from the following snakes: I, B.jararaca; 2, B.jararacussu; 3, B. 
alT~~:: B. alternatus; 5, B. moojeni; 6, B. neuwiedi; 7, B. cotiara, 8, L. muta; 9, C.d. coOineatus; 10, C.d. 
within the genus Bowops. The molecules of the venoms acting as specific elements have 
been identified by their molecular weighL The absorbed specific sera are being used to isolate 
the specific antigens for characterization and for production of monoclonal antibodies. 
References 
1. Siles-VUlaroel M, Furlanelto RS, Rolim-Rosa R, bland F & Navu J (1974). MenWrW do Instituto 
B"taNaIl, 38: 31-40. 2. MOIIB cia Silva AM, O'lmperio Lima MR, Nishikawa AK, Brodskyn CI, Dos 
SanlOl Me, Furtado MCD, Diu cia Silva W & Mota I (1990). Todeoll, 28: 181-188.3. WHO Offset 
P"b/kGdoll, 58: 1~5. 4. 11010 AR & Romano-HolO SARWL (1978179). MenWrW do Instituto Butantan. 
42143: 373~96. 5. Chippaux JP & Tbeauton RGO (1987). Annalr 0/ Troplcol MetDciM and Parasitology. 
81: 301-304. 6. Caay 0 & Raykundalia C (1988). In: Cally 0 (Editor),Anlibodie,: A Practical Approach. 
IRL Prua, Olford, I: 66-67. 7. TbeaUton ROO, Lloyd-Jones MJ & Reid HA (1977). l.ancet. 2: 639-641. 
S. ShuSlcr L (1971). In: Jakoby WB (Editor), Methodl III IIZ)""OIoD. 22. Academic Preas, New York, 
411~31. 9. Towbin II, Stachclin T & Ocxdoft J (1979).Proedin&1 O/tM National ACGdmry o/Sc/encel. 
USA, 16: 4350-4354. 
ReuMd MlllY:h 23, 1990 
Accepted May 29, 1990 
	526463_0001
	526463_0002
	526463_0003
	526463_0004
	526463_0005
	526463_0006
	526463_0007
	526463_0008
	526463_0009
	526463_0010
	526463_0011
	526463_0012
	526463_0013
	526463_0014
	526463_0015
	526463_0016
	526463_0017
	526463_0018
	526463_0019
	526463_0020
	526463_0021
	526463_0022
	526463_0023
	526463_0024
	526463_0025
	526463_0026
	526463_0027
	526463_0028
	526463_0029
	526463_0030
	526463_0031
	526463_0032
	526463_0033
	526463_0034
	526463_0035
	526463_0036
	526463_0037
	526463_0038
	526463_0039
	526463_0040
	526463_0041
	526463_0042
	526463_0043
	526463_0044
	526463_0045
	526463_0046
	526463_0047
	526463_0048
	526463_0049
	526463_0050
	526463_0051
	526463_0052
	526463_0053
	526463_0054
	526463_0055
	526463_0056
	526463_0057
	526463_0058
	526463_0059
	526463_0060
	526463_0061
	526463_0062
	526463_0063
	526463_0064
	526463_0065
	526463_0066
	526463_0067
	526463_0068
	526463_0069
	526463_0070
	526463_0071
	526463_0072
	526463_0073
	526463_0074
	526463_0075
	526463_0076
	526463_0077
	526463_0078
	526463_0079
	526463_0080
	526463_0081
	526463_0082
	526463_0083
	526463_0084
	526463_0085
	526463_0086
	526463_0087
	526463_0088
	526463_0089
	526463_0090
	526463_0091
	526463_0092
	526463_0093
	526463_0094
	526463_0095
	526463_0096
	526463_0096a
	526463_0097
	526463_0098
	526463_0099
	526463_0100
	526463_0101
	526463_0102
	526463_0103
	526463_0104
	526463_0105
	526463_0106
	526463_0107
	526463_0108
	526463_0109
	526463_0110
	526463_0111
	526463_0112
	526463_0113
	526463_0114
	526463_0115
	526463_0116
	526463_0117
	526463_0118
	526463_0119
	526463_0120
	526463_0121
	526463_0122
	526463_0123
	526463_0124
	526463_0125
	526463_0126
	526463_0127
	526463_0128
	526463_0129
	526463_0130
	526463_0131
	526463_0132
	526463_0133
	526463_0134
	526463_0135
	526463_0136
	526463_0137
	526463_0138
	526463_0139
	526463_0140
	526463_0141
	526463_0142
	526463_0143
	526463_0144
	526463_0145
	526463_0146
	526463_0147
	526463_0148
	526463_0149
	526463_0150
	526463_0151
	526463_0152
	526463_0153
	526463_0154
	526463_0155
	526463_0156
	526463_0157
	526463_0158
	526463_0159
	526463_0160
	526463_0161
	526463_0162
	526463_0163
	526463_0164
	526463_0165
	526463_0166
	526463_0167
	526463_0168
	526463_0169
	526463_0170
	526463_0171
	526463_0172
	526463_0173
	526463_0174
	526463_0175
	526463_0176
	526463_0177
	526463_0178
	526463_0179
	526463_0180
	526463_0181
	526463_0182
	526463_0183
	526463_0184
	526463_0185
	526463_0186
	526463_0187
	526463_0188
	526463_0189
	526463_0190
	526463_0191
	526463_0192
	526463_0193
	526463_0194
	526463_0195
	526463_0196
	526463_0197
	526463_0198
	526463_0199
	526463_0200
	526463_0201
	526463_0202
	526463_0203
	526463_0204
	526463_0205
	526463_0206
	526463_0207
	526463_0208
	526463_0209
	526463_0210
	526463_0211
	526463_0212
	526463_0213
	526463_0214
	526463_0215
	526463_0216
	526463_0217
	526463_0218
	526463_0219
	526463_0220
	526463_0221
	526463_0222
	526463_0223
	526463_0224
	526463_0225
	526463_0226
	526463_0227
	526463_0228
	526463_0229
	526463_0230
	526463_0231
	526463_0232
	526463_0233
	526463_0234
