The University of Strathclyde 
Glasgow 
Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering 
The Development of an Integrated 
Modelling Framework to Aid with 
the Design of Endovascular Devices 
Martin van Zyl 
A thesis in fulfilment of the requirements for the 
degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Copyright statement 
Under the terms of the United Kingdom copyright acts as expressed by the 
University of Strathclyde Regulation 3.49, the work contained in this thesis belongs 
to the author. Acknowledgement must be made if the content within this thesis is 
used in any form.  
Acknowledgements 
I would like to start by thanking Dr William Dempster and Prof David Nash for their 
supervision, patience and guidance. It was a privilege to be part of the dynamic 
research team created by these two inspirational individuals. 
I would then like to thank Terumo Vascutek for part funding this project. A special 
thanks to Mr Tim Ashton and Mr David Stevenson whose trust in the academic 
process allowed for continuous industry support.  
Within the University of Strathclyde, I would like to thank Dr Phil Riches for his 
supervision over all bioengineering aspects of this project. Without his support, 
large sections of this thesis would not have been feasible. I would also like to thank 
my academic colleagues Alan Jappy, Lewis Brown, James Ure and Peter Jenkins for 
their advice and friendship.  
Finally I would like to convey a special thanks to my mother, Lizette van Zyl. Without 
her continuous love, support and motivation this body of work would not have been 
possible.  
Abstract 
In product design environments where safety is critical, industries can often be 
reluctant to adopt emerging technologies. This is the case for many endovascular 
device manufacturers, where advanced non-linear Finite Element Analysis methods 
are still to be incorporated into their product design functions. To encourage 
adoption this thesis explores the merits and limitations of newly developed 
constitutive models as implemented into leading numerical analysis software suites. 
Specific attention is given to the Holzapfel soft tissue and Auricchio Nitinol 
constitutive models. 
Limitations and merits are explored through the development of an integrated 
modelling framework. This framework was constructed around a case study for 
which Vascutek's Anaconda
 stent graft system was chosen. In its final iteration 
the framework took the form of a series of python scripts which could be imported 
into Abaqus 6.11 to generate a variety of FE studies. 
For the development of the python scripts, a generalised artery material model was 
required for which a vascular characterisation programme was initiated. This 
programme mechanically characterised three human abdominal aortas using 
uniaxial and biaxial characterisation methods. By deploying Anaconda proximal ring 
devices within cadaver specimens and recording deformations, the programme 
produced detailed out-of-plane deformation data for vascular tissue. Where 
possible, results obtained were combined with those found in the academic 
literature. From this, comprehensive data sets were created from which a 
generalised mechanical description for the abdominal aorta was proposed. In this 
study, the accuracy of such a generalised arterial description was also explored for 
the first time. 
The work herein present a range of advanced Finite Element modelling techniques.  
These techniques range from a bespoke three layered abdominal aorta arterial 
model to novel wire bundle modelling methods. A comprehensive study into 
Nitinol's load path dependency effects is also presented.  The study correlated the 
effect as captured within experimental results against those predicted by Finite 
Element Analysis. Findings of this study highlight limitations within the Auricchio 
constitutive model as implemented into Abaqus 6.11 and emphasise the need to 
model the entire loading regime when conducting Finite Element studies. 
The extensive validation procedures used to determine the accuracy of the 
integrated modelling framework are presented. It is shown for the case study 
chosen, that the framework is capable of capturing a range of complex device-
artery interactions. It is also shown that the model is capable of predicting 
deformations within 35% of that measured during device deployment and cadaver 
specimen pressure-inflation experiments.  
It is a conclusion of this thesis, that from an understanding of the limitations 
involved, current FE technologies could be feasibly integrated into product design 
methodologies through the development of robust, computationally efficient 
design tools. 
Foreword 
This study follows a thesis completed by Dr Emma McCummiskey for the fulfilment 
of a PhD degree. It continues and expands upon the work presented within her 
thesis with the aim of addressing realistic artery simulations. 
Contents 
1.1 The Anaconda
Nomenclature  
AAA   -  Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm  
ABT   -  Abdominal Test 
CAD   -  Computer Aided Design 
COF   -  Chronic Outward Force 
DVE   -  Digital Video Extensometer 
EVAR   -   Endovascular Aneurysm Repair 
FDA   -  Food and Drug Administration 
FE   -  Finite Element 
FEA   -  Finite Element Analysis 
NHS   -  National Health Service 
NL FEA   -  Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis 
LPD   -  Load Path Dependency/Dependant 
ISO   -  International Organization for Standards 
IMA   -  Inferior Mesenteric Artery 
SMA   -  Superior Mesenteric Artery 
RRF   -  Radial Resistive Force 
1.0 Introduction  
Medically, aneurysms are defined as a dilation of the arterial vessel wall due to 
localised weakening. They are often asymptomatic, in many cases going 
undetected. If left untreated aneurysms can rupture, resulting in disability or death. 
Aneurysms are common in the western world with smoking, hypertension and poor 
diet being factors thought to contribute to their development. Their serious nature 
and commonality results in 12,000 related deaths each year in the UK [1].  
Of these 12,000 deaths, approximately 6,000 are attributed to Abdominal Aortic 
Aneurysm (AAA). In developed countries, AAA's occur in approximately 6% of men 
and 1% of women aged over 65 [2]. Rupture of AAAs can lead to severe pain, 
tachycardia, hypotension, poor perfusion, loss of consciousness and in many cases 
rapid death. The high mortality rates associated with AAA rupture results in 2% of 
all male deaths in the UK [3].    
Within the UK's National Health Service (NHS), a monitoring programme is normally 
initiated once a developing AAA has been detected. During this monitoring 
programme aneurysm growth is monitored until an unacceptable size is reached or 
symptoms develop. For abdominal aneurysms, an arterial diameter of between 5 to 
5.5 cm is generally regarded as the stage at which intervention is required [4].  
Once intervention is required, there are two methods of treatment;  open surgical 
and endovascular repair. Open surgical repair has historically been the treatment of 
choice, with the first documented procedure in 1951 [5]. Since then, open repair 
procedures have remained relatively unchanged with cross clamping of the aorta, 
removal of the affected region, and the insertion of a knitted graft to replace the 
removed section [6]. This surgical technique is complex and traumatic to the human 
body due its invasive nature. Records indicate that in 2004, the 30-day mortality 
rates for open surgery were approximately 4.7% [1]. 
Compared against open surgery, endovascular repair is a relatively modern method 
of AAA intervention. The first documented procedure was conducted by Parodi in 
1991 [7]. Since then the fundamentals of Endovascular Aneurysm Repair (EVAR) has 
remained largely unchanged, with the insertion of a modular woven bifurcated graft 
which acts as a conduit for blood flow outlining the procedure. In most cases, the 
endovascular device is implanted through a small incision in both femoral arteries, 
using a sheath and catheter system to manoeuvre the device in place. As a 
minimally invasive procedure, live x-ray guidance is used for identification of the 
aneurysm and positioning of the device. The procedure can often be administered 
under spinal, epidural or simply local anaesthesia. 
Patient suitability for EVAR is normally assessed by a specialist based on patient 
anatomy and risk factors which include cardiac, pulmonary and renal status [8]. 
With the current state of EVAR, 50 to 60% of patients can be treated by  
endovascular means [8], although these figures are subject to constant change due 
to developments within the field.  
Neither open nor endovascular surgery have been definitively proven to be 
superior. When looking at post four year recovery rates, several studies have shown 
similar all-cause mortality rates between the two methods [9], [10]. Whilst 
endovascular surgery has a shorter post-operation recovery period, re-intervention 
rates for this treatment tend to be higher. With both open surgery and EVAR 
procedures carrying merit and associated risks, the choice of treatment is patient 
specific to be determined by a specialist.  
In the case that a vascular surgeon elects for endovascular treatment for an AAA, a 
variety of endovascular devices are available. These devices are manufactured by a 
host of medical device companies situated in various countries. Current EVAR 
device manufacturing leaders within Britain are Cook Medical, Medtronic and 
Terumo Vascutek. In this study, an EVAR device offered by Terumo Vascutek will be 
examined in detail. 
For the design of their products, Vascutek uses classic design methodologies rooted 
largely in experimental based procedures. These methods tend to be supported by 
empirical data and rigorous validation procedures. Although time consuming, 
endovascular device manufacturers often prefer proven design methodologies, due 
to the safety critical nature of their products.  This can hamper the adoption of 
modern CAD techniques, a problem reinforced by the highly complex nature of the 
materials involved. 
To further encourage adoptions of CAD techniques, academic research groups have 
worked on producing improved vascular tissue constitutive models over the last 
decade. Due to the progress made, these advanced constitutive models have 
recently become commercially available within leading FEA suites. This has brought 
with it the opportunity to implement these technologies within endovascular 
product design.  
Although improved constitutive models are now available, reluctance to adopt new 
methods still remains within the industry [11]. This reluctance will remain until such 
time the merits and limitations of emerging technologies are clearly defined 
through an independent assessment. To carry out such an assessment, the project 
presented herein was created. It was the aim of this project to investigate the use 
of emerging technologies in the field of numerical analysis for the design of future 
endovascular devices. This assessment was conducted around a case study, for 
which the Terumo Vascutek Anaconda
 device was chosen. The Anaconda device is 
a successful EVAR device which have been used in over 17,000 treatments with a 
94% procedural success rate according to clinical trials [12] .  
The study was conducted through the development of an integrated modelling 
framework which could be used to study the interactions between the Anaconda
and an arterial wall. In its final iteration, the framework was in the form of a series 
of python scripts. The scripts could be imported into Abaqus 6.11 in a prescribed 
manner to generate a variety of FE studies. The FE model created by the framework 
focussed on the simulation of three critical stages of the Anacondas life cycle being; 
The forming stage of the proximal ring during which key manufacturing steps were 
captured; a device compaction stage during which the proximal ring is compacted 
into sheath-like diameters; and a deployment stage during which the device is 
deployed into a simulated arterial vessel. Once deployed the device could be 
subjected to the cardiac cycle from which key strain-stress data could be obtained. 
1.1 The AnacondaTM 
The Anaconda device received CE certification in April 2004 and has since become a 
popular choice for endovascular surgeons. Since certification it has gone through six 
commercially available design generations. Although much has changed since 2004 
and product variations exist, the basic design principles have remained broadly 
unchanged. The device is comprised of three components being a bifurcated main 
body into which two legs are coupled (Figure 1.1). Each of these three components 
consists of a super-elastic Nitinol scaffold onto which knitted polyester graft fabric is 
sutured. The skeleton consists of an intricate pattern of wire strands and bundles. 
Key to the performance of the device is the skeleton's ability to allow for 
compaction into a catheter, remote deployment, device anchorage and adequate 
sealing of the aneurysm sacs whilst accommodating cardiac compliance. The 
skeleton, therefore, dictates much of the mechanical characteristics of the device 
whilst the polyester graft acts as a conduit for blood flow. 
The Anaconda is available in a range of sizes to provide the best patient specific fit 
possible. A total of eight body sizes are available, enabling treatment of an aortic 
diameter range of 16 mm to 32 mm. Further customization through a number of leg 
sizes and configurations are available.  
Figure 1.1: The Anaconda device manufactured by Terumo Vascutek. 
A number of engineering challenges have to be considered when designing 
endovascular devices. For the Anaconda stent graft device, primary considerations 
are that of strength and fatigue characteristics, which must be balanced against the 
functional requirement of sealing. To meet the design requirements, a property 
referred to as "oversize" is carefully considered per patient. The property of 
"oversize" refers to various elements of the Anaconda but essentially refers to the 
proximal ring having a nominal diameter larger than the artery into which it is 
delivered. Through this, when deployed within the vessel, the device applies a radial 
force to the surrounding tissue. This outward force is crucial to the device's overall 
performance and is strongly linked to the diameter ratio between the vessel and 
device. If the device's outward force is too low, conditions such as a type 1 endoleak 
or stent migration can occur [13]. If, however, the radial force is too high, the device 
could damage the vessel. 
In addition to the proximal ring's wire diameter, oversizing also influences the mean 
strain a device experiences in situ. The device's stiffness in turn, dictates its 
Main Body 
Proximal Ring 
Coupling Iliac Legs 
compliance to the cardiac cycle, and through this, dictates the strain amplitude it 
experiences. These two elements of mean strain and strain amplitude are then 
strongly related to the device's fatigue life, which must be optimised per patient to 
meet regulatory standards. ISO 25539-1 dictates that the device should have a 
minimum life span of ten years which corresponds to a minimum of 400 million 
cycles. The need for any new design iteration of the Anaconda to comply with ISO 
25539-1 can result in experimental methods being slow and impractical. FE 
methods provide the opportunity of an efficient preliminary assessment of new 
designs, by allowing detailed strain and stress calculations to be compared against 
fatigue performance data. In addition to this, for current design iterations, radial 
force estimations can be produced for combinations of ring diameter, wire diameter 
and number of wire turns, in simulations using patient-specific geometry. This data 
has the potential to be used by design engineers to reduce the size of the Anaconda 
device which could allow a broader spectrum of patients to be treated, many of 
whom are currently rejected due to risk factors associated with the size of the 
catheter required for device delivery. For these reasons, an Integrated Modelling 
Framework, which can be used to effectively assess device combinations and 
explore new designs, has significant value. 
1.2 Research goals and objectives 
The principal goal of this project was to assess current constitutive and FE 
capabilities for the use in the design process of endovascular devices. The 
motivation for this assessment came from the rapid advance in the constitutive 
modelling of soft tissue and Nitinol over the last decade. Further incentive came 
from advantages a FE capability could bring into the proposed context.   
As an additional goal, the research project aimed to contribute to the growing 
number of data sets available for vascular tissue material model development. 
Areas within vascular tissue characterisation requiring further study were to be 
highlighted through an extensive literature review. Once highlighted, areas were to 
be addressed through a dedicated experimental programme.  
In addition to furthering knowledge within the field of soft tissue characterisation, 
the project had the goal of furthering knowledge of Nitinol FE modelling. Novel 
modelling techniques were to be proposed for the modelling of endovascular 
products constructed from the alloy.  
Objectives of this body of work could be stipulated as follows: 
 Development of a reliable and computationally efficient integrated 
modelling framework.  
o This project was to build upon previous studies to move towards the 
development of an endovascular device product design tool.  
o During development of the integrated modelling framework, focus 
was to be placed on the efficiency of FEA simulations. Efforts were to 
be made to reduce computational expense without a compromise on 
simulation accuracy.  
o The framework was to be robust, being able to successfully solve for 
the entire design envelope of the Anaconda device.  
o The framework was to have quantified levels of accuracy determined 
through rigorous validation procedures.   
 Explore the use of an arterial constitutive model formulated around the 
micromechanics of arterial tissue for use in the framework.     
o The framework was to include a generalised arterial model based on 
the typical patient age at which AAA intervention is required.  
o Material models developed through this project were to be 
validated. 
 Limitations of current Nitinol constitutive modelling were to be explored 
o A FEA investigation into Nitinol load history effects were to be 
conducted.  
o Novel Finite Element modelling techniques were to be suggested for 
wire bundle representation.   
1.3 Thesis structure 
A complexity of this project was the broad range of topics which were to be 
addressed in unison. With this in mind, chapter 2 is dedicated to a broad and 
comprehensive literature review.  The review initially covers the endovascular 
repair of aneurysms and studies relevant to the one presented herein. The subjects 
of Nitinol and Vascular tissue are then addressed in turn, focussing on the 
micromechanics, mechanics and FE modelling of each.  
With the literature review presented, chapter 3 presents the vascular tissue 
characterisation programme. As characterisation activities were imperative to the 
overall accuracy of the integrated modelling framework developed, emphasis is 
placed on the experimental techniques and experimental equipment used. 
Experimental results are presented per specimen before being collated and 
compared against relevant data obtained from the literature.    
Chapter 4 addresses the development of the integrated modelling framework. The 
framework is presented in its final form with the various iterations leading to its 
final form omitted for conciseness. Data fitting procedures required for the 
development of material models are also presented within this chapter.  
Chapter 5 presents work conducted to validate the framework. Validation 
procedures focussed on the comparison of FE predictions against experimental 
results. Where possible, comparisons against analytical solutions were also made.  
With the validation work presented, focus in chapter 6 turns towards Finite Element 
studies conducted using the framework created. The first of these is a relevant 
study into Nitinol's load history dependency effects, a study during which its impact 
on design is clarified. The chapter is concluded with an investigation into the 
limitations and merits of a generalised soft tissue model. 
Chapter 7 will conclude the present work through a discussion on the suitability of 
FE within the proposed context. This discussion draws from the multitude of studies 
conducted during this research project and through this, identify its novelty. The 
contributions made to the academic field will also be clearly identified. Finally, 
recommendations for further study will be made before closing remarks are given.    
An outline of the thesis is provided in figure 1.2. 
Figure 1.2: Schematic representation of this thesis's structure  
Chapter 2: A Literature review is presented   
highlighting current research gaps. 
Chapter 3: An experimental programme is 
completed to establish material modelling 
and validation data using human aortic 
specimens.  
Chapter 1: Research goals and objectives 
are introduced and motivation is provided.  
Chapter 4: The framework is developed 
using data obtained from the experimental 
programme. 
Chapter 5: The design tool is validated and 
its merits and limitations explored. 
Chapter 7: Thesis conclusions are provided. 
Chapter 6: FEA studies are completed using 
the developed tool and novel modelling 
methodologies are proposed.  
2.0 Literature review 
The FE simulation of endovascular devices and their interaction with the arterial 
wall combines a broad range of complex academic fields. A thorough literature 
review was therefore required, the main findings of which are presented in this 
chapter.  
Within the review knowledge gaps are first identified through assessing published 
literature. The review then focuses on aspects of endovascular device design, 
Nitinol and vascular tissue mechanics. Each of these topics are addressed in detail, 
providing background to studies presented in following chapters.  
2.1 Numerical modelling of device-artery interactions 
When conducting the literature review, a lack of studies was found which 
considered stent-graft interactions with the arterial wall. This finding was not 
unique, with a recent publication in the Journal of Endovascular Therapy stating; 
"Published reports on simulation of the mechanical behaviour of stent-graft are 
almost non-existent" [11]. Another finding by the current author, which was 
supported by this publication, is that the studies which are available through 
published literature, are often subject to severe simplifications regarding their 
representation of the arterial wall. The lack of published studies on stent-graft 
interactions highlights knowledge gaps in device-artery deformation data and the 
need for accurate computational frameworks to conduct such studies.  
Recognising the knowledge gap which exists, a report published in 2015 by Perrin et 
al.,[14] examined the interactions between a stent constructed from Nitinol and a 
hyper-elastic arterial model. Although clearly driven by the same academic 
questions as the current work, no statements of simulation accuracy were provided 
within the published study. Crucially, the model created within the publication was 
never validated. To this extent, the publication only demonstrates that a FE solution 
is possible when conducting these complicated studies. Furthermore, the arterial 
model used within the publication does not address the multi-layered nature of the 
arterial wall and is based on a Mooney-Rivlin constitutive model, a purely 
phenomenological formulation. To the present work, comments on the feasibility of 
FEA within the endovascular device design process can only be made after having 
explored the accuracy of the simulations conducted.       
A report published in 2013 which produced a comprehensive, three layered arterial 
model with patient specific geometry, considered the deformations imparted onto 
the arterial system when catheter-like devices  are inserted into the lumen [15]. As 
a conclusion of this work, the suitability of using FE analysis to preoperatively  
identify patient specific procedure risks was supported. As a framework which was 
also to some extent validated, the study is a valuable contribution to the academic 
field of endovascular device design. With relation to the present study, the 
publication, however, focussed on catheter systems and the macroscopic 
deformation of the arterial system. The work herein is in contrast focussed on 
localised effects and stent-graft devices.  
A peer reviewed article which provides a good summation of the current state (up 
to  2012) of stent-graft numerical analysis is a publication by Roy et al., [16]. The 
publication summarises and praises the advances made in constitutive modelling 
over the last decade, yet calls for realistic stent-graft models to be created to 
improve design. The article specifically calls for more attention to be given to the 
device-artery anchoring locations, suggesting that interactions at these locations 
are still poorly understood. The knowledge gaps identified within this paper is 
central to the present study.  
A number of studies were found which aimed at determining the behaviour of 
coronary stents in situ  [17][20]. In most of these, the object of the study was to 
investigate wall stresses. In this context, contact forces between endovascular 
devices and arterial wall is well addressed due to its relevance to restenosis [21]. 
Overall, however, it was found that a limited number of these publications 
attempted an accurate arterial model based on human arterial data. Those who 
had, such as Lally et al., [18], commonly used 316L stainless steel as the alloy in 
question. The work herein is differentiated by its focus on graft-stent devices 
manufactured from super-elastic alloys and their interactions with the arterial wall 
represented by a layer specific,  hyper-elastic arterial model.  
A study which has attempted a validated hyper-elastic arterial model is a 
publication by Brand et al., [22]. Within this study an Ogden hyper-elastic arterial 
model was used in an attempt to investigate stent/artery interactions. The object of 
the  research was again to ascertain the wall stresses induced by stents for the 
purpose of investigating restenosis pathology. Although relevant, linear material 
models were used in device representations.  
Pelton et al. conducted a study into the NLFEA modelling of Nitinol medical devices 
[23]. The study confirms that FE can produce agreeable results to that measured in 
experiment when testing Nitinol specimens of different     temperatures at 37
The study also confirms that FEA can adequately predict force displacement results 
of Nitinol diamond-shape fatigue specimens. Although a valuable contribution, the 
study did not address stent/artery interactions. This omission is central to the work 
presented within this thesis.   
The work presented herein follows a study conducted by McCummiskey et al., [24]. 
Within the study McCummiskey addressed the development of a product design 
tool around the Anaconda device as a case study. The study laid a foundation for 
the modelling of the Anaconda device but was unfortunately subject to several 
limitations. Foremost of these limitations were: 
 The tool was computationally expensive. This made the tool impractical for 
commercial implementation. 
 The Device/Artery model employed a silicone material model to simulate 
the behaviour of the artery. This was seen as a significant limitation with 
speculative accuracy.  
 The model suffered from robustness issues, with the complex contact 
conditions resulting in element distortion and contact surface penetrations. 
 Problematic boundary conditions resulted in reduced accuracies.  
 The tool was inflexible, modelling a single deployment case.  
In spite of these limitations, a reliable approach was established. Since the 
submission of the thesis in 2008, further developments within the field of FEA have 
brought forward the opportunity to address limitations through the work presented 
herein.  
2.2 The use of Nitinol in endovascular devices  
Nitinol is a so-called "super-elastic" alloy, capable of elastic strains of up to 8%. This 
ability to cope with large strains has resulted in Nitinol being increasingly used in 
medical applications where large scale deformations are likely to occur [25]. 
Common applications include products deployed through minimally invasive 
procedures and endovascular devices which are prone to in situ crushing [26]. 
Consequently, although general in nature, the findings of this thesis are especially 
relevant to the growing number of endovascular devices with Nitinol incorporated 
into their design [27].  
The most common endovascular device is the stent which has been used for 
vascular intervention since 1960 [28]. Stents were initially commonly manufactured 
from stainless steel with Nitinol variations appearing in the early 1990s. Early 
applications of endovascular devices were limited to the treatment of stenosis 
which is still a common medical procedure. Since the advent of the stent in the 
1960's the approach has improved dramatically with modern drug eluting stents  
becoming common [29], [30]. Stent grafts, the sub category under which the 
Anaconda is placed, were eventually used for the first time in 1991 for the 
treatment of an aortic aneurysm [28].     
Within 10 years of the first endovascular stent graft treatment, a further 11 FDA 
approved stent graft devices were available on the market in the United States 
alone [26]. Most of these had Nitinol incorporated into their design. First generation 
devices commonly had an intent-to-treat success ratio of up to 93.8% [13]. As is still 
the case with modern generations, early failures were mostly attributed to type 1 
endoleaks, emphasising the importance of adequate sealing of the devices [31].  
Nitinol possesses a wide range of unique mechanical properties which makes it 
remarkably well suited for use in a variety of endovascular devices. A distinctive 
feature of Nitinol is its stress-strain hysteresis which is characterised by  
pronounced upper and lower stress plateaus. Product design engineers have found 
that through correct design and delivery procedures, medical devices can be made 
to operate on the lower plateau of the stress-strain curve [27]. As the nominal 
stress states at which the plateaus are encountered can be controlled by material 
processing techniques, engineers are able to control the force that stents exert on 
the vessel wall. The exceptionally large strain range over which the plateaus exist 
also entails that the stent can easily cope with variable in situ conditions whilst still 
applying the same predicted force on the vessel wall. This feature, often referred to 
as the Chronic Outward Force (COF) [24], [32], provides immense consistency for 
designers and provides reassurance for medical practitioners on crucial matters 
such as the sealing properties of devices.   
Accompanying Nitinols COF is another favourable property referred to as the radial 
resistive force (RRF). The RRF property refers to the tendency of Nitinol specimens, 
operating on the lower plateau, to resist further loading through another linear 
modulus. This modulus is approximately equal in magnitude to that of the first 
linear modulus and aims to return the specimen to the upper plateau. Through this 
characteristic, stents can be thought to have a biased stiffness, exerting a force 
according to its COF, yet resist further deformation by the vessel wall through a 
greater RRF.  
Further endovascular medical products that have made use of Nitinols unique 
mechanical properties include vena cava filters which are used to prevent 
pulmonary emboli [33]. Nitinol based occlusion devices have also become more 
popular in recent years, a trend driven by the opportunity for simplified delivery 
procedures [27]. The number of endovascular devices continues to grow with a host 
of devices already available. Amongst others, current leaders within the field of 
endovascular device design are Boston Scientific, Cook Medical and Terumo 
Vascutek. 
Nitinol has been used to make guidewires for the deployment of catheters since the 
1980s [8].  Its superior performance in this application is largely thanks to its 
excellent kink resistance and flexibility which provides advantages over stainless 
steel and titanium. Nitinols kink resistance is attributed to its super-elastic 
properties and idiosyncrasies associated with its stress-strain curve. It can be shown 
that continual loading beyond the upper plateau results in another elastic region, 
where the modulus increases dramatically until slip and limit load are incurred.   
Through this property kinks are resisted through a more uniformly spread strain 
distribution [27]. Nitinols kink resistance has also provided further grounds for its 
use in stent manufacturing where there is a perceived risk that once implanted the 
stent could become deformed through externally applied forces. Lastly, Nitinol's 
kink resistance has made it exceptionally suitable for the use in  Homer Mammalok 
devices, organ retrieval systems, snares and embolic protection devices [34].  
Further non-endovascular medical applications are bone staples, spinal cages, 
suture anchors, heart valve sizers and flexible micrograspers [35]. Non-medical 
applications range from spectacle frames to under wires for bras. All of these 
applications make use of Nitinol's unique properties to some extent and continual 
research into the metals application must be seen as warranted.  
2.3 Nitinol 
For the purpose of conciseness, focus is placed on Nitinol in its super-elastic state 
and the accompanying shape-memory effect has been largely omitted from 
discussion. The alloy's micromechanical behaviour is discussed in detailed, focussing 
on the alloy's molecular structure. Effects such as stress-strain behaviour, fatigue 
properties and load dependency effects are also addressed.  
2.3.1 Crystallographic structure of Nitinol 
The feasibility of using endovascular devices as a method of aneurysm repair quite 
often relies on the use of exotic materials to cope with the challenging delivery 
methods and in situ conditions. Nitinol, developed by the Naval Ordnance 
laboratory in 1960, has been used with great success for many of these applications 
as discussed in section 2.1.   
Although often referred to as a Shape-Memory Alloy (SMA) it is Nitinol's 
accompanying pseudoelastic property that makes it of particular use for 
endovascular devices. It is observed that under the right conditions these SMAs 
display super-elastic behaviour which enables them to withstand strains in excess of 
8% without incurring plastic deformation. This property makes SMAs especially 
well-suited to catheter delivery systems, enabling minimally invasive surgery.  
Nitinol (NiTi) is a near-equiatomic alloy of Nickel and Titanium. The ratio is 
commonly 49.0 to 50.7 at.% titanium, where super-elastic alloys lie in the region of 
49.0 to 49.4 at.% [36]. In its stable condition, Nitinol has a body centred cubic 
structure referred to as austenite. Under loading, a remarkable crystallographic 
solid-state phase change occurs. During this phase change the parent austenitic 
structure is transformed into an unstable face centred cubic structure referred to as 
martensite. The resulting martensitic lattice represents a more staggered, irregular 
molecular structure when compared to the parent austenitic structure (figure 2.1). 
The martensitic lattice shown in figure 2.1 is heavily twinned and can easily be 
deformed through the process known as detwinning [37], [38]. Through the 
detwinning process atomic bonds in the structure are not broken under increased 
loading. Instead, the twin boundaries move to produce a shape that better 
accommodates the applied load [39]. Due to crystallographic restriction, with the 
removal of load the initial orientation of atoms can be restored. It is thus through 
Nitinols remarkable molecular phase change that the metal can cope with strains of 
up to 8% without plastic slip occurring. 
Figure 2.1: Image representing a Nitinol specimen in tension. 
The phase atomic shift is accomplished through a shear type process at a 
predetermined strain and temperature state. The exact states at which the atomic 
shift will occur are sensitive to specimen manufacturing processes and are also load 
direction dependant.  The transformation process itself is a complex and widely 
researched topic. It is understood that in polycrystal specimens transformation is 
initiated through nucleation. The transformation then propagates through regions 
of large strain and crystals of preferred orientation. Authors studying this behaviour 
of Nitinol in thin sheets [40] have reported Lders-like bands developing under load. 
It is hence thus that the transformation from austenite to martensite is complex 
and heterogeneous in nature.  
Load direction 
Twinning direction 
Austenitic structure 
Martensitic structure 
Digital Image Correlation (DIC) techniques have shown that during loading, even 
upon apparent complete transformation of the material, small pockets of austenitic 
crystals can still be found [41]. The heterogeneous behaviour of Nitinol at a 
microscopic level is mostly attributed to material defects, crystal orientation and 
geometric instabilities [40].   
Without any mechanical loading a solid-state phase transformation from austenite 
to martensite can be achieved through temperature control of a Nitinol specimen. 
Figure 2.2 displays the austenitic/martensitic ratio as a function of temperature in a 
Nitinol specimen. What can be seen from this graph is that for each specimen of 
Nitinol, a series of key temperatures exists which marks the onset of various stages 
of the austenite-martensite transformation. To this body of work the most relevant 
of these is the    temperature, above which Nitinol is in its stable austenitic phase 
and is said to be in its super-elastic state. For the Anaconda devices, specifications 
to suppliers generally demand      temperatures of between 10
C to 15
C. This 
specification ensures that super-elastic behaviour is observed when operating 
within the human body at 37
Figure 2.2: Schematic representation of the fraction of martensite as a function of temperature. 
Subscripts   and   represents the transformation of start and finish points of either austenite 
(A) or martensite (M). 
An important but often neglected constituent of the austenite-martensite cycle is 
an intermittent phase. The phase, referred to as the R-phase, only develops under 
certain conditions during the transition between Nitinols body centred cubic to 
face centred forms. The phase develops when the parent cubic phase elongates 
along one of its diagonals, reducing the cube angle and producing a rhombohedral 
structure [42]. The formation of R-phase crystals within the austenite lattice has a 
notable effect on the materials stress-strain response, generally delaying the onset 
of the martensitic lattice. In practice the R-phase is generally unwanted and can be 
eliminated through correct Nitinol grade selection.  
Effective control of ageing processes and temperature control of Nitinol specimens 
also plays a key role in avoiding the onset of the R-phase. It has been noted within 
this study that the primary interest lies in specimens 15 degrees above their     
temperatures at which onset of the R-phase constituents is understood not to be an 
issue [42], [43].    
An important aspect of Nitinol is that both the transformation and reorientation 
processes dissipate energy [44], [45]. The energy is released in the form of heat 
which can have consequences for a metal where the properties are highly 
temperature dependant. In experiments involving Nitinol, active temperature 
control is often employed to compensate for thermal effects. Loading at sufficiently 
slow loading rates to simulate near quasi-static loading conditions has also been 
shown to be sufficient to compensate for the exothermic effects. Nitinols 
mechanical properties have been found to be largely strain rate independent if 
isothermal conditions are established during testing [46].  
As previously mentioned, Nitinols energy dissipative processes result in 
pronounced hysteretic behaviour. This behaviour can, for instance, be clearly 
observed in the materials stress-strain response an example of which can be seen in 
figure 2.3. The stress-strain response provides a convenient platform for discussion 
and as such is frequently referenced within this thesis.     
2.3.2 Uniaxial stress-strain behaviour of NiTi specimens 
The stress-strain regime can be divided into phases as marked by points A through E 
in figure 2.3. As can be seen in figure 2.3, initial loading of a specimen is met by a 
conventional linear elastic modulus (A-B). This elastic modulus is commonly 
between 40GPa and 75GPa, similar to that of Aluminium. Once a nominal state of 
stress is reached (B), the energy required for nucleation of martensitic participates 
is provided. Twin pairs are established and any additional loading is met through 
little resistance as the specimen deforms through the detwinning mechanics 
described in section 2.2.1. Once the entire specimen has transformed and 
detwinned (assumed here to be point C) any further deformation is met with 
conventional mechanisms of linear elasticity and slip until failure occurs. Unloading 
from the upper plateau, is met by a linear elastic response referred to as the second 
elastic modulus. At nominal stress value (D) a lower plateau is reached along which 
any further unloading will propagate. Continual unloading results in the complete 
transition back to the parent austenitic phase (E), at which point another linear 
elastic region is encountered.  
The exceptionally large hysteresis loop (A, B, C, D, E) displayed by Nitinol's stress-
strain curve indicates that a significant amount of energy is dissipated during a 
loading cycle. It is worth noting that the stress-strain behaviour of as drawn 
specimens differs remarkably from that shown in figure 2.3. Typically a level of cold 
working and heat treatment is required before super-elastic behaviour is noted 
[32]. Furthermore, figure 2.3 represents the stress-strain behaviour of a specimen 
at temperatures above its     temperature which is typically between -20
C and 
C. It is observed that above 100
C Nitinol alloys gradually lose their super-
elastic properties and behave in more conventional terms.  
As shown in figure 2.3, Nitinols stress-strain response in compression and tension is 
asymmetric. Most notable is that in compression Nitinol does not exhibit the 
distinct flat plateaus normally associated with the alloy. When compared with its 
-2000 
-1600 
-1200 
-0.1 -0.08 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 
Strain, E22 
Tensile Test 
Compressive Test 
tensile response, the transformation stress tends to be significantly higher and the 
strain at which the second elastic modulus is countered lower.  
Nitinol's asymmetry is well researched with a host of publications available on the 
topic [41], [47]. For the present work, Nitinol's asymmetry presents significant FE 
challenges. Foremost of these is that the asymmetric response is yet to be 
adequately captured within constitutive modelling. Currently the Auricchio 
constitutive model, as implemented within leading numerical software suites, offers  
the option of capturing asymmetry effects through a single parameter [48]. This lack 
of control offered to end users can lead to an ill-fitting material model with a 
compressive response that is not representative of experimental data.  In addition 
to these issues, the use of an asymmetric material definition within FE analysis 
introduces a significant additional computational burden through the introduction 
of an asymmetric stiffness matrix within the numerical analysis process. 
Figure 2.3: Stress-strain curve for a 1 mm diameter Nitinol wire in both compression and 
tension. Nitinols distinctive hysteretic behaviour is clearly visible.  
2.3.3 Fatigue properties of Nitinol 
As with many aspects of Nitinol, its fatigue characteristics are multivariable and 
complex. However, much of the literature available on the topic [45], [49], [50] 
concludes that Nitinol excels within strain controlled environments, whilst relatively 
poor results are obtained under stress controlled conditions. This trend is an effect 
of the super-elastic mechanism where high strains generate relatively low stresses, 
whilst high stresses result in excessively high strains. As the Anacondas in situ 
conditions are representative of a strain controlled loading environment such 
findings further supports Nitinols popularity within the endovascular device 
industry.   
Published studies into the fatigue properties of Nitinol can be found as far back as 
1981, with an early study by McNichols  et al. into the fatigue behaviour of thermal 
shape memory Nitinol up to 2.2x10
cycles [51] . Results through this study produce 
a linear S-N curve, a finding which was later supported in a more recent publication 
[52]. These results differ from linear elastic materials for which a power law S-N 
curve are common. Nitinol's unconventional S-N curve results are closely linked to 
its atomic phase shift which affects mechanisms of crack propagation, and Nitinol's 
response to mean strain and temperature as discussed below. 
Crack propagation: Although the literature available on crack propagation induced 
through cyclic loading in Nitinol is by no means extensive, a growing number of 
papers are available for study. In general, tests examining Nitinol's fatigue crack 
propagation resistance have found that non transforming microstructures far 
outperform transforming microstructures [53]. The low fatigue crack growth 
resistance in transforming microstructures is believed to be associated with the 
small negative dilation (.5%) associated with the transformation from austenite to 
martensite. Through this it can be shown that additional cyclic tensile stresses are 
established around the crack tips, promoting crack growth [54].   
Machereach et al. correlated crack growth with deformation modes within Nitinol 
[50]. Through this study correlations were established between the deformation 
modes and fatigue performance of Nitinol specimens. Using X-ray microdiffraction 
techniques, Robertson et al., [55] completed an in depth study into this topic and 
found that the areas in the wake of an advancing crack tip would transform back 
into the parent austenitic phase. The paper continues in support of the notion that 
crack tip propagation investigations, even during the development of fatigue test 
data, must be under loading conditions representative of the intended application 
to be relevant. This is in part due to the way in which crack propagation 
mechanisms can change in transformation microstructures depending on specific 
loading states. The study also highlighted the large crystallographic anisotropy that 
exists within each Nitinol specimen and the crucial role grain alignment plays in 
crack propagation.  
Mean strain effects: The proximal ring of the Anaconda device is generally oversized 
compared to the lumen in which it is implanted. For this reason it is vital that the 
bending fatigue characteristics of Nitinol should be studied at non-zero-mean 
values. On this topic various authors [56], [57]  have published several studies, the 
results and conclusions of which are all in relative agreement. It has been found 
that unlike conventional engineering material Nitinols cyclic fatigue endurance 
gradually increases with increasing mean strain (trend seen up to 7-8 % mean strain 
for super-elastic specimens). A publication by Robertson et al., [55] ascribed this 
effect to increasing volume fractions of martensite present within specimens which 
has been shown to have better fatigue properties than the parent austenitic phase. 
With this it was also shown that strain amplitude has a greater effect on fatigue life 
than mean strain, with constant life diagrams as shown in figure 2.4 indicating that  
strain amplitudes below 0.40 result in a fatigue life above ten million cycles. 
Although the effect has been attributed to increased volumes of martensite, this 
trend shown on figure 2.4 could also be partly explained through the previous 
discussion on transforming and non-transforming microstructures. 
Relative temperature effects: As the properties of Nitinol have been shown to be 
strongly temperature dependant, several authors have studied the correlation 
between fatigue performance and     temperatures [55], [58]. The most relevant 
findings to the work herein are that for specimens experiencing transforming 
microstructures, specimens operating at 10
C above their     temperatures have 
been shown to perform best.  
Figure 2.4: Constant life diagram of an axial specimen under displacement controlled loading 
conditions produced by Duerig et al., [56]. Squares marked in red indicate failures whilst 
squares left blank surpassed a ten million cycle benchmark.  
2.3.4 Nitinol's load path dependency  
Load path dependency has recently been highlighted as a property requiring further 
study by a number of authors [24], [59]. The property refers to the phenomenon 
where Nitinols state variables are load history dependent whilst operating within 
the super-elastic regime. For the present study this property was especially relevant 
due to its potential influence on fatigue characteristics.  
Within the published literature, the topic of load path dependency has been 
touched upon on the side of larger experimental programmes. Rebelo et al., [60] 
have, for example, shown through investigations that modern material models are 
able to capture the behaviour of Nitinol specimens subject to non-uniform cyclic 
loading regimes. As an idiosyncrasy that stems from the energy dissipative nature of 
the phase transformation, this implies that empirical-based Nitinol constitutive 
models do capture load history effects. To this author's knowledge, however, no 
study has solely addressed the property whilst exploring the impact it might have 
on effective product design.  
2.3.5 Biocompatibility   
In addition to its pseudoelastic behaviour, Nitinol exhibits several additional 
properties that make it particularly suitable to the biomedical fields. Foremost of 
these properties is Nitinols biocompatibility which comes despite of its high nickel 
content that is considered to be toxic.  Nitinols biocompatibility is thought to be a 
result of being an intermetallic compound rather than an alloy in a pure 
metallurgical sense [32]. Through being a compound, stronger bonds are 
established between Nickel and Titanium within Nitinol than in Nickel precipitates 
often found in steel. Testing conducted by Zollikofer et al., [61] have consistently 
shown that Nitinol is less corrosive and more chemically stable than stainless steel 
which is used in many medical applications. During tests in which Nickel-Titatnium 
were submerged in synthetic saliva at 37
0c for 72 hours, corrosion rates in the order 
of          have been recorded which again perform favourably against many 
grades of stainless steel. 
As Nitinol is less magnetic than stainless steel, image distortion is less likely to occur 
during MRI scanning. In this regards, NiTi displays suitability comparable to pure 
titanium [27]. 
2.3.6 Auricchio Nitinol constitutive model    
A host of constitutive models are available for the material modelling of Nitinol. 
Integrated into the industry-leading FEA software suites, Abaqus 11.2 and ANSYS 4, 
is the Auricchio constitutive model [48], [62]. This model was chosen for use within 
this project due to its commercial accessibility.  
The material model is based on an internal-variable formulation known as 
generalized plasticity. It is this framework that is used for the construction of the 
constitutive model. The model is created to take into account various key features 
including dissimilar material behaviour in compression and tension and the 
martensitic reorientation processes. What is important to note is that the material 
model is not based on phase-transition micromechanics. Instead it is formulated 
from thermo-mechanical continuum theory based on the aforementioned internal-
variable formulation technique (generalised plasticity). The micromechanics are 
captured through evolutionary equations used to describe internal variables. 
A key aspects of the internal variables within the Auricchio model  is that they relate 
to the phase transition and reorientation processes. Through this the 
micromechanics of the transition is captured. Aspect upon which the formulation is 
based include: 
 Initial and final stress-strain conditions for each phase transition 
 Dependence of the phase transition on temperature 
 The pressure dependence of the phase transition 
2.3.6.1 3D model formulation 
Stress () and Temperature (T) are used as control variables. In order to create the 
transformation and hysteretic behaviour, a transformation strain (   ) is used. The 
transformation strain is added to each element when phase transformation 
conditions are met in such a form that the total strain can be expressed as shown in 
equation 2.1.  
                                                                   (2.1) 
Where    is the elastic portion of the strain as calculated by the Young's modulus 
whilst     is a term representing the recoverable plastic deformation. The term     
can be expressed as shown in equation 2.2. 
                                          (2.2) 
Variable     within equation 2.2 is in turn dependant on three terms captured 
within the tensor   and the maximum elastic strain   . These three terms, as 
expressed in equation 2.3, refer to three super-elastic processes: the Austenite to 
Martensite transformation (AS); the Martensite to Austenite transformation (SA); 
and the Martensite reorientation processes (SS).  
                                                          (2.3) 
Another relation used within the formulation is the fractions of Austenite      and 
Martensite     present within an element, the sum of which is assumed to be unity.  
                                                                    (2.4) 
These equations stated above are used as a base to create the material model. 
From these equations the more complex evolutionary equations are derived which 
are used to model the balance of    and   , the derivation of which can be found in 
[62].  
Equation 2.5, as proposed by Auricchio et al., [62],  forms a key part in the material 
model formulation. The variable H is a logic parameter (H = 1 or 0) which contains 
the phase transition activation conditions.   Is a material parameter influencing the 
speed of transformations whilst F is a function of the stress state, deviatoric 
stresses and internal pressures.  
         (2.5) 
Within equation 2.5, the first term marked in red is the source term for the 
Martensite (A-S) fraction within each element whilst the second term in blue can be 
interpreted as a sink term for the Martensite fraction (S-A). These terms are 
activated through parameter H, at conditions coinciding with positions B, C D and E 
in figure 2.3. Through this the fraction of Martensite, and hence the fraction of 
strain induced through the super-elastic mechanism, is established.  
Through this review of the Auricchio Nitinol constitutive model it can be seen that 
the model is highly phenomenological, with a notable disregard to underlying 
micromechanics. The constitutive model has however been subjected to extensive 
peer revision with numerous studies indicating that the model is capable of 
replicating tensile experimental results to reasonable degrees of accuracy [47], [60], 
[63]. Less information is available on the models ability to replicate compressive 
results, especially that of thin wire [41].   
2.3.7 Nitinol literature summary 
This section reviewed academic studies relevant to the present work. It was clear 
from the literature available that the fundamental micromechanical behaviour of 
Nitinol has been intensively studied. As a result a wealth of knowledge is available 
on the subject through publication. Distinct areas requiring further work have 
however been highlighted by leading authors in more advanced micromechanical 
topics. These topics include crack tip propagation mechanisms which is fundamental 
for the full understanding of fatigue properties.  
With the current understanding of Nitinol's fatigue performance, the literature 
suggests caution when it comes to applying generalised fatigue data [55]. A strong 
case can be made that load case-specific yield criteria and fatigue data must be 
produced for devices manufactured from Nitinol operating in safety critical 
applications. With several publications which support this reasoning, custom 
designed studies to assess fatigue performance must be seen as the only 
responsible way to assess the performance of medical devices. As experimental 
methods can be impractical when assessing the life span of prototype devices, 
these findings give support to the use of alternative methods such as the Finite 
Element Method during design. This argument applies specifically to the Anaconda 
device where the proximal ring is subject to complex loading. This also further 
supports research into FE design tools which can be used for both adequate product 
design and device optimisation.   
The lack of information regarding Nitinol's load history dependency is seen as an 
area requiring further investigation relevant to the present body of work. The 
relevance comes from the complex loading regimes imposed onto the device during 
delivery and the ambiguity this might have on stress and strain states. Further 
investigations into the effect were therefore warranted within this thesis.  
Through the literature review it has been seen that Nitinol's asymmetry is a well- 
documented metallurgical effect. In spite of this, it is currently inadequately 
captured within constitutive modelling. This inadequacy could have a significant 
influence on the accuracies of simulations conducted through the integrated 
modelling framework. As with these findings, the present project was given an 
additional objective of addressing Nitinol's asymmetry as captured within FEA.   
2.4 Vascular tissue 
Within this section relevant literature on the topic of vascular tissue is assessed. 
Focus within the review is initially placed on general mechanics before data on the 
abdominal aorta is provided. A brief review of arterial constitutive modelling is 
made available in section 2.3.10. 
The pathology and mechanics of aneurysms is complex. As the Anaconda device 
anchors in healthy tissue and bypasses the aneurysm sack, this thesis will not 
address the mechanics of diseased tissue. Interested readers are referred to 
references [64], [65] and [66] for further information.   
2.4.1 Arteries  
Arteries form part of the cardiovascular system, which also includes the heart and 
venous system as displayed in figure 2.5. The work herein is primarily concerned 
with the characteristics of arteries and as such the other forms of cardiovascular 
tissue will be omitted from discussion.  
The most prominent of all arteries is the aorta which is a single systemic artery 
emerging from the heart. It can be seen as the origin of oxygenated blood flow 
which feeds the entire body through successive branching. As the largest arterial 
form, it is segmented for referencing purposes with a descriptive naming 
convention. The aorta leaves the heart as the ascending aorta before curving 
around to form the aortic arch. At the aortic arch the first major branch vessels are 
found namely the brachiocephalic, left common and left subclavian arteries (figure 
2.5).  The aorta then descends down into the chest cavity as the descending aorta 
until the diaphragm is reached. The aortic region below the diaphragm is referred to 
as the abdominal aorta from which major branching vessels are the renal, superior 
and inferior mesenteric arteries (SMA, IMA). From the abdominal aorta the vessel 
bifurcates into the common iliac which eventually, after further bifurcation 
becomes the femoral arteries. Here the successive branching continues until 
capillary beds and arterioles eventually feed soft tissue with nutrients in the outer 
limbs. Once nutrients have been supplied to the soft tissue, blood returns to the 
heart through the venous system.  
Figure 2.5: Cardiovascular system of the human body. To the right the aorta is shown along 
with the naming convention used. Within the body shown, an abdominal aneurysm has been 
superimposed, showing the typical location and structure of this arterial disease.     
Aortic arch 
Descending aorta 
Renal artery 
Abdominal aorta 
Iliac artery 
Abdominal aneurysm 
Brachiocephalic 
Left common 
Left subclavian 
2.4.2 Function of arteries 
The main function of the arterial system is to distribute nutrient rich oxygenated 
blood throughout the body. Within the cardiovascular system arteries acts as a 
pressure reservoir, supplying constant blood flow to capillary beds throughout the 
cardiac cycle. The arterial system thus forms a crucial part in regulating blood 
pressure within sections of artery, for instance near the common carotid 
bifurcation, carrying baroreceptors for this purpose.  
2.4.3 Components of arteries 
As seen in figure 2.6 the structure of arterial tissue is complex. The main 
components are smooth muscle cells, elastin, collagen, endothelium, connective 
tissue and a glycosaminoglycan-rich ground substance. These constituents of the 
arterial wall can be grouped into active and passive components. Of the passive 
components the most structurally significant are elastin and collagen. It is these 
passive components that give arterial tissue its passive mechanical properties which 
are often measured under laboratory conditions.  
Figure 2.6: Structure of the artery [67]. 
Adventitia 
Intima 
Media 
Endothelial cells 
Collagen fibres 
Elastic sheath 
Muscle cells: Muscle cells found in the arterial system are known as involuntary 
muscle. With a helical arrangement, muscle contraction is used to control the 
lumen diameter of medium and small arteries through a process called 
vascoconstriction/vascodilatation. Muscle tissue is therefore clearly an active 
component that influences the mechanical properties of the artery to meet blood 
pressure and flow requirements.  
As an additional function, muscle cells are responsible for the synthesizing of elastin 
and collagen. Through this they are also responsible for the maintenance and 
remodelling of the arterial extracellular matrix.   
Elastic Fibres: Elastic fibres consists of two components: a core of elastin, 
surrounded by fibrillin microfibrils in a sheath-type arrangement. The elastin is the 
principle component within this arrangement, making up approximately 88-92% of 
the fibre [68]. With a Youngs modulus of approximately .45 MPa the fibres are 
highly elastic and can stretch in excess of 150% without breaking.  
Collagen:   In humans there are over 28 known types of collagen. Only two of these, 
type 1 and 3, accounts for the majority found in arterial tissue [69]. With an 
ultimate tensile strength of 50 to 100 MPa, it is collagen which adds stiffness and 
strength to organic structures [70]. With its high tensile strength collagen fibres are 
the most mechanically significant constituents within the arterial wall.  Due to its 
mechanical importance, collagen is often the focus during the study of vascular 
mechanics and vascular constitutive modelling.  
Each collagen fibre is complex in nature, being made from fibrils and microfibrils. 
This construction increases flexibility and reduces the risk of rupture due to crack 
propagation [71].  Within stress free vascular tissue collagen is found to be 
undulated.  With collagens limited elasticity (10%), the crimped arrangement 
provides a level of extension to the artery before dramatically stiffening the 
macroscopic response. The specific arrangement and orientation of collagen within 
the artery is an important factor influencing vascular mechanics.  
Collagen within vascular tissue is controlled through a balanced mechanism of 
synthesis and degradation [69]. These mechanisms are adjusted to respond to local 
stimuli, being it mechanical or disease. An example of this adjustment is for instance 
seen in the pathology of aneurysms, where it is found that increased proteolactic 
activity breaks down elastin, whilst the collagen production increases in an attempt 
to strengthen the diseased structure.  
2.4.4 Structure of arteries  
At any one topographical site, the various constituents listed in sections 2.3.3 can 
be found in different ratios through the radial thickness of the artery. In mature 
arteries these variations are of such nature that they effectively create three 
distinct layers referred to as the tunica intima, tunica media and tunica adventitia. 
Each of these layers, due to their specific ratio of components, plays a distinctive 
role in the overall mechanics of the artery. Throughout the vascular system, the 
relative size of these layers change to adapt to the specific function that the arterial 
segment fulfils and the mechanical stimuli it will experience.  
In general it is observed that arteries closer to the heart are more elastic in nature, 
whilst arteries further along the vascular tree appear more muscular. This variation 
in attributes often leads to arteries being divided into one of three groups being 
elastic, muscular and arterioles. These groupings have relevance to the additional 
functions that these arteries often perform, with elastic arteries acting as a pressure 
reservoir and muscular arteries controlling blood flow and pressure. Arterioles are 
the smallest type of arteries and relatively the most muscular.  
The three layers mentioned (Intima, Media and Adventitia) often play a key role in 
FE modelling of the arterial wall. The layers provide a convenient method of 
grouping the heterogeneous wall properties into manageable subgroups which can 
be assumed to be orthotropic in nature. Little is published on the accuracy of the FE 
modelling of individual layers as opposed to capturing the global response of the 
vascular wall as a single entity. The reason for this might lie with the relatively 
recent development of constitutive models which are able take into account 
histological features. Collagen fibre angle directions have only recently been 
incorporated into commercially available FE codes (2006) [48]. The common 
assumption would be that a more detailed three layered FE model would be more 
accurate. This however might not be the case due to the complexities introduced 
when doing so. A high quality study focussed on comparing the merits of individual 
arterial layer modelling as opposed to single entity modelling can be seen as 
overdue when considering current constitutive capabilities.   
Each of the three layers is further discussed here in terms of their components and 
mechanical contribution. In spite of the commonality of the three-layered arterial 
representation, dissimilarities in their exact definitions can often be found within 
publications. As such, the following section conveys how each layer has been 
divided in this study.    
Tunica Intima:  The intima has at its inner surface (next to the lumen) a thin layer of 
endothelial cells held onto a basal lamina mostly constructed from collagen. In 
young healthy arteries, it provides a negligible mechanical contribution due to its 
relative thickness [72]. The intimas main function is to provide a non-clotting 
surface for blood flow and allow for molecule transfer. In elderly patients, or 
patients with significant arterial disease, it has been found that intimal hyperplasia 
thickens this layer with the net effect of increasing the layer's mechanical 
contribution.  In the present work the intima extends from the lumen to the first 
elastic lamina. 
Tunica media:  The first elastic lamina is seen as the boundary between the intima 
and media. The media extends to a less prominent external second elastic lamina 
which acts as the boundary to the adventitia.  Between these lamina sheets the 
media exists as a concentric pattern of elastic fibres and smooth muscle cells. 
Woven in between the elastin are bundles of collagen fibrils.  
Tunica Adventitia: In young arteries the adventitia is approximately 1/5 of the wall 
thickness and as such is relatively small. It has however, in spite of its size, a 
significant influence on the overall behaviour of the vascular wall. This is due to high 
collagen content which is arranged as a dense network interspersed with fibroblast 
and elastic fibres. Collagen fibres within the adventitia are generally thought to be 
orientated longitudinally, providing protection against over dilation.  
Arterial perivascular tissue: Perivascular tissue surrounds the adventitia and 
anchors it to surrounding features. The prevalence of perivascular tissue is 
dependent on its topographical site. Vertebral arteries, for instance, are partially 
encased in the spine whilst cerebral arteries are partially surrounded by 
cerebrospinal fluid. This study will not include the mechanical effects of perivascular 
tissue and as such will exclude their effect from further discussions.  
2.4.5 Local arterial adaptability  
Vascular tissue is well known to be adaptive to local mechanical stimuli. Regions 
experiencing excess mechanical stimulus have been shown for instance to recruit 
collagen to stiffen the arterial response. The heart too also offers examples of 
localised adaptability; the left ventricle is often found to be thicker in patients who 
suffer from high blood pressure, whilst it is relatively larger in patients with a 
leaking aortic valve [73].  
The vascular property of local adaptability provides further complications when 
attempting to characterise vascular tissue mechanics. This is of particular concern 
when consideration is given to the mechanical stimuli present in uniform cylindrical 
regions that might exist in the region of an arterial feature. The abdominal aorta 
provides a good example of this where regions around the SMA and renal arteries 
are branch feature intense, whilst the region distal to this is uniformly cylindrical in 
nature.   
Supporting the need for local characterisation is an investigation conducted by Kim 
et al., [74] which studied the local variation of mechanical properties in arteries. The 
investigation was specifically aimed  at comparing the anterior and posterior side of  
porcine arteries at the same topographical site. Variations in properties were noted 
which further highlights the localised heterogeneity. Previous studies [73] on this 
subject have shown an increase in wall thickness around branch features on canine 
iliac femoral arteries. Although data published on this matter is preliminary in 
nature, evidence has suggested significant macro and microscopic variations in 
regions containing structural features.  
Although histological adaptability is clearly well documented, the impact of branch 
features on the mechanical properties of surrounding tissue is not. If significant 
variations are found to exist, current methods of regional characterisation might be 
inadequate for material modelling purposes. The assumption of mechanical 
consistency over large regions should hence be further investigated and associated 
errors better quantified.    
Limited mechanical characterisation data is available for arteries. As this is the case, 
and human arterial samples scarce, regional characterisation has remained 
prevalent in spite of local variations that might exist due to local adaptability. 
Furthermore, due to the precious nature of human samples, regional 
characterisation has typically been conducted in regions of straight segments where 
uniaxial specimens can easily be harvested. As the Anaconda device anchors just 
distal to the renal arteries, ambiguity exists around the applicability of  
characterisation data not taken from this region. A study aimed at clarifying the 
mechanical variations that might exist in the presence of arterial features could 
therefore be seen as much needed. This study could also further clarify the specific 
pathology of abdominal aneurysms. It has indeed been observed that suprarenal 
aneurysms are much less common than infrarenal aortic aneurysms [75] yet little 
has been done to clarify the reasons for this.  Some reference to this phenomenon 
is made in the literature [76] but often, as in the referenced  papers, pressure wave 
mechanics are listed as a possible contribution to this trend without much 
justification.  
2.4.6 Relative behaviour of arteries in situ against in vitro  
An issue pertinent to this project was that of the relative behaviour between 
arterial tissue in situ and in vitro. This issue was a concern as characterisation data 
available through studies are generally obtained through in vitro studies. As the end 
objective of this research project was to produce simulations representative of in 
situ conditions, the errors associated with this approach had to be clarified.  
Active and Passive Behaviour: As the arterial wall contains muscle cells its 
mechanical properties are variable. In spite of this, an invariant material model is 
required for FE implementation. This introduces considerable complications to 
material model development, as all characterisation activities must occur around a 
single activation state.  
Relevant to this issue is an in depth investigation conducted by Wagner et al., [77]. 
This study was aimed at quantifying the effects of muscle activation in both 
muscular and elastic arteries. Within this study several arteries were characterised 
in their activated, basal and passive states. Active and passive states were achieved 
through treating specimens with endothelin-1 and sodium nitroprusside solutions 
prior to characterisation. Specimens characterised without interference were 
considered to be in their basal state.  
The study found that for elastic arteries, the active and basal response were very  
similar in nature. This meant that for elastic arteries, the level of activation post 
basal conditions, has little effect on the overall behaviour of specimens. In muscular 
arteries this trend was reversed with the active response being much stiffer than 
both the basal and passive response.  
As this work was predominantly interested in the abdominal aorta, which is a highly 
elastic artery, the basal response tested in the laboratory was deemed to be 
representative of in situ conditions.  
In situ environment: Overall, the influence that surrounding organs have on in situ 
vascular mechanics is still poorly understood. Only in recent studies has this issue  
been addressed to any significant extent. 
On this subject Kim et al., [78] produced a study in which the effects that 
surrounding tissue has on vascular mechanics were investigated. Several 
conclusions relevant to the present work were made. Most significant of these were 
findings suggesting that the arterial wall thickness is closely linked to the 
mechanical significance of surrounding tissue. Although a valued contribution, the 
study stopped short of detailed mechanical characterisation.  
With an appreciation of basic mechanics, the organs surrounding the arterial vessel 
will likely influence device-artery interactions through resisting arterial 
deformation. Data which quantifies the magnitude of this influence around the 
abdominal aorta is, however, not yet available. With current computing capabilities, 
FEA, and even the computational framework developed herein, could feasibly be 
used in a parameter study to investigate the likely significance of surrounding 
tissue. This parameter study could be basic in nature, for example, representing 
organs through boundary conditions placed on the adventitia. With current 
computing capabilities, this method of representation would also be the only 
feasible way of accounting for surrounding tissue within detailed device-artery 
interaction simulations. Accounting for the effects of surrounding organs within 
device-artery interaction simulations is seen as an objective which should be met 
once ex-vivo device-artery interactions are successfully modelled, and as a result, 
will not be included in the modelling framework developed herein. 
The abdominal aorta is mostly surrounded by soft tissue organs, with only the spinal 
column in close proximity to its anterior side. The spindle nature of abdominal 
aneurysms, which can grow to diameters three times the original aortic size, further  
provides evidence that the abdominal aorta is not rigidly constrained on any one 
side.  
Dynamic Loading: The loading conditions to which the arterial system is subject are 
dynamic in nature.  This is mostly due to the constant variation in blood pressure 
induced by the cardiac cycle and external forces.  Studies have shown that during 
the cardiac cycle, arterial motion within the body is predominantly in the 
circumferential direction [69]. This implies little or no shear stresses resulting from 
twisting and suggests that the pressure pulse can be assumed to be radial in 
direction.  
It should be noted that local blood pressure can vary greatly depending on the 
orientation of the human body. A person standing has a significant blood pressure 
differential between their head and feet due to hydrostatics. Studies have for 
instance shown that blood pressure within the dorsalis pedis arteries of a healthy 
man standing can be as high as 154.3 mmHg. This is well above what is typically 
assumed for the abdominal region [79].  
In this study, a pressure range of 100 20 mmgh was assumed for the abdominal 
region. Studies have shown this to be a valid assumption for a healthy adult, supine 
in posture [79].  
2.4.7 Residual stresses within arteries  
Arteries contain a significant level of in situ residual stresses which is generally well 
documented [76], [80], [81]. The axial component of these stresses can most easily 
be observed as arteries are seen to retract longitudinally by up to 30% when first 
dissected from the body. Residual stresses are also common in the circumferential 
direction which is believed to exist in an attempt to homogenise stresses within the 
wall when pressurised.  
The axial and circumferential residual stresses of arteries are often separately 
referred to as "internal stretch" and "residual stresses" respectively. For clarity this 
convention was adhered to in this thesis. Within the literature, internal stretch is 
also commonly quantified by a single percentage stretch value whilst residual 
stresses are characterised through the opening angle a dissected tubular section 
takes.  
In recent published investigations, comprehensive studies have aimed at 
quantifying residual stresses in each of the arterial layers [82]. Through the studies 
published the extraordinary complexity of the arterial wall has further been 
revealed.  Unfortunately, results published on this issue tend to be subject to high 
values of standard deviation. This can partly be attributed to the complexity 
involved in residual stress characterisation. 
Trends within results however suggest that each individual layer is subject to a 
unique set of 3D residual stresses. Stresses within each layer also seem anisotropic 
in nature with planar sections showing various degrees of in situ stretch in different 
directions.  These results suggest that the simplistic method of opening angle 
measurements might be insufficient in capturing the true nature of in situ residual 
stresses in specimens.    
Parallel to publications on 3D residual stresses in the arterial wall have been studies 
attempting to incorporate this data into FE models. Unfortunately only a very 
limited number of these are available for scrutiny and those which are tend to be 
subject to severe material simplifications [83].   
2.4.8 The effects of ageing 
Aging has a profound effect on the vascular system, the effects of which have been 
well documented within the literature [84], [85]. Typical effects of aging can be 
listed as follows: 
 Increased wall thickness  
 Increased stiffness related to the relative increase in collagen content 
 Increase of the number, and thickness, of elastic lamellar units 
 Blood pressure within arteries tend to increase 
 Longitudinal in situ stretch decreases 
 Increased susceptibility to arterial disease 
The mechanical influence of the effects listed above can be dramatic. Ideally then 
when performing FE simulation studies, material models should be based on 
characterisation data from specimens of relevant age. Age effects also then drives 
the need for improved vascular characterisation data sets as it provides yet another 
variable which should be limited during statistical analysis.  
2.4.9 The abdominal aorta 
The type and degree of loading an endovascular device is subjected to in situ 
depend largely on the topographical site into which the device is implanted. For 
devices implanted into the abdominal aorta, the cyclic loading imparted is 
predominantly caused by the motion of the vessel due to the cardiac cycle. It is well 
known that during ventricular ejection the aorta, pulmonary arteries and other 
large distribution arteries distend rapidly, accommodating 50% of the stroke 
volume [69]. The vessel then retracts, maintaining a flow through the smaller 
muscular arteries and capillary beds. During this cycle of dilation and contraction 
the abdominal aorta can typically experience a diameter change of 9 to 12%.   
As a valuable contribution, Weisbecker et al., [72] completed an in-depth study on 
the mechanical properties of the abdominal aorta. The study completed was 
comprehensive in the sense that layer-specific samples were mechanically 
characterised into supra-physiological regions. Results are published in parameter 
form, allowing for the integration of results into finite element material models. 
Although comprehensive in nature, a regional form of characterisation was adopted 
(obtaining specimens from across the abdominal aorta), with ambiguity existing 
around the exact location from where specimens were harvested. With reference to 
discussions within this thesis regarding local variations in vascular mechanics 
(section 2.3.5), this information is essential to the work herein. Furthermore, as 
these comprehensive studies are rare, further investigations are required in order 
to produce meaningful datasets.  
Collagen content ratio, fibre orientation and distribution have been extensively 
studied in the past. Data available on this topic for the aorta tends to be 
comprehensive in manner, with site and layer-specific data available for several 
locations. Generally, results suggest that within the abdominal aorta, the mean 
angles of collagen fibres increases through the radial thickness of the wall (from 
approximately 20
  to 60
 ) [71]. The level of dispersion around the mean angle also 
tends to increase through the radial thickness. Although this would imply that an 
asymmetric fibre layup is present within the aorta, no published study could be 
sourced which specifically studied the coupling effects which could arise from this. 
With the arterial motion being predominantly in the circumferential direction 
during the cardiac cycle [69], it is reasonable to suspect that potential coupling 
effects are somehow counteracted, possibly through residual stresses or 
attachment to perivascular tissue. Further research on this topic is however 
required.  
2.4.10 Vascular constitutive modelling 
Recent advances in the constitutive modelling of vascular tissue has signalled the 
onset of  models driven by underlying micromechanics, moving away from pure 
phenomenological models. Advanced models tend to be based on collagen fibre 
angle and distribution, recognising the mechanical importance of these 
constituents.  
Although a number of models are available for the modelling of arterial tissue [86]
[88] this project used the Holzapfel constitutive model. This is mainly due to the 
models commercial availability and the peer revision to which the model has as a 
result been subjected.  A brief overview of the Holzpafel constitutive model is 
presented herein as a basic understanding of the model structure is beneficial for 
later sections of this thesis. As derivations can be extensive, they are omitted. 
Instead, derived expressions and a description of terms are provided. Interested 
readers are referred to references [80], [89] for further details.  
2.4.10.1 Holzapfels constitutive framework 
The approach taken within the Holzapfel description is to use a free-energy function 
to describe the materials anisotropic hyper-elastic response. The arterys structural 
complexity is reduced to a non-collagenous ground matrix which is reinforced by 
two families of collagen. Within this representation, the non-collagenous matrix is 
assumed to be isotropic.  
Collagen is represented by two families that are symmetrically disposed to each 
other with respect to a circumferential axis by an angle . The angle , and the 
dispersion of fibres around this angle is set through a user inputs parameter. It is 
the angle and distribution of the collagen fibres that invokes and dictates the level 
of anisotropic behaviour of the models. With this representation, there is no radial 
component to fibre families. This assumption in turn renders the model incapable of 
capturing the orthotropic nature of the arterial wall. To address this issue modelling 
techniques are required, such as the individual modelling of arterial layers.   
2.4.10.2 Continuum description 
To form the continuum framework, a general description of deformation is first 
established. Within this description the variable     is taken to be the fixed 
reference configuration of a body.  With this reference, deformations can be 
described through equation 2.6. 
                                                                             (2.6) 
Within equation 2.6   is a function that transforms points ( ) in the reference 
configuration,      to a position ( ) in the deformed configuration  . This 
transformation can be expressed as shown in equation 2.7. 
                                                                                (2.7) 
Further the standard deformation gradient and local volume expressions required 
for numerical integration are stated here in equation 2.8 and 2.9 respectively.  
                                                                         (2.8) 
                                                                            (2.9) 
As the vascular tissue is incompressible, the deformation gradient   is placed into a 
state of multiplicative decomposition. The decomposition consists of its dilatational 
and distortional parts which can be expressed as shown in equation 2.10, where   
denotes a standard second order unit tensor. 
                                                                                  (2.10) 
The right and left Cauchy-Green tensor (  and  ) associated with equation 2.10 can 
be expressed as shown in equation set 2.1.  
The strain is characterised by the Green-Lagrange strain tensor E, where the 
associated modified counterpart is represented by     as shown in equation 2.11 and 
2.12.  
                                                         (2.11) 
                                                                             (2.12) 
To characterise the hyper-elastic response of vascular tissue second order tensors 
(  ) is used and the existence of Helmholtz free-energy function   is proposed. As 
the energy function is dependent on the structural tensors and the Green-Lagrange 
Strains, the free energy function can be expressed in terms of its volumetric      
and isochoric contributions (  ) as shown in equation 2.13.  
                                              (2.13) 
With it demonstrated how the expression of strain is related to the free energy 
function, the stress-strain relationship can be expressed in terms of the second 
Piola-Kirchhoff stress as shown in equation 2.14. 
                                                            (2.14) 
With the basic relationship between stress, strain and the free energy term 
presented, equation 2.13 can be restated using the Cauchy Green tensor as a 
measure of deformation. The free energy function can also be further specialised to 
Equation set 2.1 
vascular mechanics by assuming incompressibility, which leads the volumetric 
contribution to be purely a Lagrange contribution.    Is thus taken to be purely 
isochoric and based on the two families of collagen. Through this, the structural 
tensors can be reduced to two second order tensors which describe the structure of 
the tissue at any unit volume. Through applying these steps equation 2.13 can be 
transformed into equation 2.15.  
The energy function as stated in equation 2.15 was first presented by Holzapfel et 
al., [90]. At the core of this description lie simplifications placed on the underlying 
structure of vascular tissue. Most notable of these is the use of the two families of 
collagen to represent collagen content (     ). Although novel at the time, in the 
form shown in equation 2.15, the description is limited through failing to take into 
account collagen distribution around mean orientations.  Through this limitation, 
equation 2.15 describes transversely isotropic conditions instead of the required 
anisotropic.  
                                                    (2.15) 
In an attempt to address the issue of collagen distribution Holzapfel et al. took this 
description further by modifying the structural tensors. This was accomplished 
through the introduction of a generalised structure tensor denoted as     , the 
expression of which is shown in equation 2.16. In equation 2.16,   is a single unit 
vector around which distributions of fibres are described through the normalised 
function whilst variables   and   denote mean fibre angles around which the 
distributions occur.  
                                                              (2.16) 
With the introduction of the density function     , the structural tensors as 
expressed in equation 2.15 take the new form H as shown in equation 2.17. In this 
compact description,    is the preferred material orientation whilst the parameter k 
is introduced.  
                                                            (2.17) 
It can be seen from the above expression that the structural tensors rely only on 
this single parameter  . This parameter is seen as a structural parameter, which 
characterises the distribution of collagen around the mean fibre angle. During 
numerical analysis,    is assigned a value between the two limits of 0 and 1/3, the 
limits of which renders the material either transversely isotropic (0) or  fully 
isotropic (1/3), when considering in plane loading. The parameter k can be 
expressed as shown in equation 2.18, or alternatively can be determined through 
histological examination of specimens.   
                                                          (2.18) 
Equations 2.7 through to 2.18 provide an overview of the underlying principles on 
which the constitutive description is based. When implemented within Abaqus 6.11, 
constituents of the Helmholtz free energy function is grouped into two parts: one 
which calculates energy contributions from the isotropic ground matrix (  ) and 
the other which calculate contributions from the collagen fibres (  ). With this 
division, the total Helmholtz free energy function ( ) can be expressed as shown in 
equation 2.19. 
                                                                               (2.19) 
                                                                       (2.20) 
                                                                 (2.21) 
Within equation 2.20, isotropic contributions are calculated using a linear function 
which is only dependant on a structural modulus type parameter   and a second 
order unit tensor   . Expression 2.21 is constructed from elements stated within 
equation 2.6 through to 2.18. Within Abaqus, the numerical solution process is 
centred around the reduction of the free energy within a system, where zero results 
in a solution for a given boundary conditions set.   
 2.4.11 Vascular tissue summary 
It has been shown through the literature review that the mechanical properties of 
the arterial wall can be highly variable. This feature of arteries provides a major 
challenge when attempting to develop a general Finite Element model for product 
optimisation purposes.  
To overcome this issue, the variability of arterial tissue must be adequately 
addressed during model development. Furthermore, to answer questions 
surrounding applicability, the errors associated with the use of a generalised 
parameter set should be quantified. As this has not been done in the published 
literature to any extent, it was an objective of this project to investigate the 
applicability of generalised arterial models.   
Current data available within the literature is comprehensive enough to establish 
mechanical trends across the vascular system. In spite of this, insufficient 
characterisation data is available to fully determine the variability between patients 
at any one topographical site. The data currently available is a product of a previous 
focus on vascular micromechanics, a trend driven by leading authors interest in 
constitutive modelling. Data requirements for the use of the newly developed 
constitutive models are different however with a focus on macromechanics and 
comprehensive mechanical characterisation of a large number of specimens 
required. The development of large characterisation data sets will eventually allow 
for the creation of generalised, gender specific, topographical, site specific arterial 
models which are crucial for the development of advanced FE based design tools.  
Through the literature review it was found that a three layered biological 
description of arteries is common (Intima, Media and Adventitia). As the division of 
these layers are based on structural differences, it can be assumed that mechanical 
properties per layer will vary greatly. Although current constitutive models are 
capable of capturing the main underlying features which give rise to layer-specific 
properties, nothing has been published regarding the benefits or drawbacks of a 
layered FE artery model. A comparison between various arterial FE representations 
was therefore overdue, another area to which this project aimed to contribute.  
Supporting the development of a three layered FE arterial model is the variation of 
residual stresses across the wall thickness. Through basic mechanical appreciation, 
these residual stresses are seen to be fundamental to the overall mechanics of the 
arterial wall. In spite of this, little has been done to study in situ residual stresses 
through FEA. This is seen as a product of the complexity of doing so and the infancy 
of the capability. The development of the integrated modelling framework herein 
provides an excellent basis for studies such as these.  To create such models, 
however, requires layer-specific data sets, which are rare within published 
literature.  
3.0 The vascular testing programme 
This project assessed the suitability of advanced constitutive models within the 
design process of endovascular devices. Whilst similar assessments to this have 
been carried out in the past [24], previous studies have tended to focus on the 
device itself. These studies have, as a result, used extensively simplified arterial 
models with questionable degrees of accuracy.  
Simplifications associated with arterial modelling have often in the past stemmed 
from the difficulties involved in the FE representation of biological tissue. With 
these difficulties noted, various academics have over the last decade aimed at 
further developing vascular constitutive theory, whilst developers have been 
simplifying its implementation [89]. Extensive progress within this field has now 
allowed for the suitability of FE to be reassessed within this project.   
In spite of progress within the field, making use of modern arterial constitutive 
descriptions has yet to become a straightforward process. The reason for this lies 
predominantly with the considerable amount of data required for material model 
development. If a detailed, layer-specific arterial model is to be created, uniaxial 
data is required for axial and circumferential directions for all three layers. Histology 
studies are also needed to verify mean fibre angles and distributions. Furthermore, 
if the material model created from this uniaxial data is to be used in safety critical 
applications, additional load-deflection data is required for model validation 
purposes. Ideally, the load-deflection data gathered should also match the final 
simulation loading conditions closely. This is especially crucial in the cases where a 
material model derived from uniaxial (2D) data aims to replicate complex, non-
uniform (3D) loading conditions [72], [67].  
For use in this project, abdominal aorta material characterisation data were 
available from the open access literature. With the extensive data requirements 
needed for FE simulation, this data was, however, not comprehensive enough. With 
questions around the applicability of data not gathered from the exact 
topographical site of interest, this issue soon became exacerbated by further 
limiting the use of published data. A further key issue which was pertinent to the 
project presented herein is the unique loading conditions imparted by the super-
elastic proximal ring of the Anaconda device. These unique loading conditions 
created the need for bespoke data sets for validation purposes.  
A further unanswered question faced by this project was how representative 
parameters currently available within the literature were of patients to be treated 
by the Anaconda device. Although material parameters were available for use, a 
general set representative of averaged properties had not yet been proposed. A 
study was also required to better judge the applicability of such an averaged set. 
This study had to investigate whether such a set can be used over entire 
topographical regions and whether such a set is still representative in the presence 
of additional arterial features.  
With these motivations, a vascular testing programme was initiated within this 
project. Within this chapter, the main objectives of this programme are first 
outlined before test setup and protocols are discussed. Results and the conclusions 
obtained from this study are presented towards the end of the chapter. 
All the work done in this section was carried out under full ethical approval by both 
The Ethics Committee at the University of Strathclyde and Biopta, the supplier of 
tissue.  
3.1 Programme objectives   
The aim of the testing programme was to deliver comprehensive data sets, 
adequate for the FE modelling of the abdominal aorta. Once delivered, the data sets 
were to be used in the development of a integrated modelling framework which 
could be used to investigate the interaction between endovascular devices and the 
arterial wall. Data produced through the programme was to be collated with that 
which could be found in the literature. Through this, statistically significant data sets 
were to be created from which generalised Holzapfel material parameters could be 
suggested. 
For the purposes of the programme, three human abdominal aortas were studied. 
Each of these specimens was subjected to layer-specific characterisation. Anaconda 
device deployment simulations were also conducted to obtain data that could be 
used for validation purposes.  
 Data sets per specimen were to include information as follows: 
 Uniaxial stress-strain data for each arterial layer in both axial and 
circumferential directions. 
 Uniaxial stress-strain data of the intact wall. 
 Pressure - Diameter (external) readings of tubular sections. 
 Deformation measurements of the arterial vessel with a proximal ring 
implanted (Device deployment simulations). 
 Picrosirius red staining to determine the mean collagen fibre angle and 
distribution per arterial layer.  
Wherever possible, experimental data were to be kept wall layer-specific.  For the 
proposed use of the material models developed, human specimens were to fall 
within the age range of 40 to 75 years, the age at which most endovascular 
treatments are administered.  
Due to the mechanical importance of the proximal ring, only its interactions with 
specimens were examined during this programme.  
3.2 Experimental setup 
The programme objectives of conducting deployment simulations in addition to 
uniaxial/biaxial characterisation were beyond the capabilities of any single testing 
rig at the University of Strathclyde. For this reason, a Bose 3200 ElectroForce was 
utilised for all uniaxial work whilst a custom built environmental chamber was 
developed in order to carry out pressurisation and deployment simulations. An 
overview of both rigs will be presented here.  
3.2.1 Bose 3200 
The Bose 3200, figure 3.1, is a bespoke biological tissue test instrument. It features 
a single ElectroForce linear actuator with a stroke length of 12 mm. The actuator is 
capable of displacement increments of .005 mm and frequencies up to 200 Hz. For 
this project, a Bose 250 g load cell was used with a resolution of        FSO. 
Figure 3.1: Bose 3200 Series III test instrument. 
For control software, the Bose WinTest 4.1 programme was utilised. The software is 
fully comprehensive, allowing for waveform generation, data acquisition and 
instrument control. The software's block waveform function was used for waveform 
generation, the likes of which can be seen in figure 3.2. Each specimen tested was 
subjected to 12 cycles, each consisting of a series of displacement controlled loads. 
Various displacements and dwells were used for specimen training before three 
final characterisation cycles were performed.  The characterisation cycles were 
conducted at a rate of 1.2 mm/min, in accordance with rates proposed by previous 
studies [67]. 
Data acquisition occurred through the use of data scans. Twenty scans of 60 
seconds each were used to cover the generated waveform. 1200 data points were 
used per scan resulting in 20 data points per second being logged.  
TuneIQ control optimisation was used within this project. As a built in function of 
WinTest 4.1, the TuneIQ function essentially allowed PID control loops to be 
optimised by using an automatic tuning process. Porcine specimens were used for 
optimisation.  
Figure 3.2: Bose waveform used during experimentation. 
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 
Time (s) 
A Digital Video Extensometer (DVE) was used to capture strain data during uniaxial 
extension. The built-in WinTest 4.1 application, Vision 4.1, was used for this 
purpose. The DVE application operated by tracking five markers placed on 
specimens. The markers were tracked using a Prosilica, Allied Vision Technologies 
fixed lens high shutter speed camera. 
Resolution of the DVE system was setup dependent, with optimum conditions 
allowing a resolution determined by the span of one camera pixel. The span of the 
pixel could be calculated through equation 3.1 [91], where   is the distance 
between the camera and specimen in inches, whilst   is the pixel span in 
millimetres.  
                                                     (3.1) 
Within this project, a typical working distance of 12 inches was used, equating to a 
pixel span of approximately 0.017 mm. With extensions in the region of 5 mm being 
imparted on uniaxial specimens, theoretical errors of 0.34% within readings could 
be expected at maximum extension. In practice band noise and external factors 
resulted in resolutions that were highly setup dependant. During protocol 
development, resolution typically allowed for strain increments of 0.15% to be 
measured.  
The Allied Vision Technologies camera captured at a rate of 200 frames per second, 
with strain calculations being performed in real time. As the 200 frames per second 
were faster than the WinTest 4.1 data acquisition, the camera frame rate had no 
significant influence on overall accuracy. Strain calculations were transferred from 
the Vision application to WinTest as Green-Lagrange strains.  
3.2.2 Deployment rig 
A custom-built pressurisation rig was developed for the purposes of the vascular 
testing programme.  Once developed, porcine specimens were tested to ensure the 
correct operation of the entire rig. The rig in its final form, as shown in figures 3.3 
and 3.4, comprised of various components, all of which were independently 
calibrated and verified. Figure 3.3 is a schematic representation of figure 3.4. 
The rig used 2 syringe drivers (1)(2), to force a pbs solution through a heated water 
bath (3) into the test specimen (5). Through adjusting syringe driver flow rates, the 
pressure inside the test specimen could be controlled. Pressures and temperatures 
inside the specimen were measured through pressure transducers (4) and an 
implanted thermocouple (9). During experimentation, the specimen was kept in a 
sealed environmental chamber, the temperature of which was set to 37
C through 
a feedback controlled air heater (8). Independently, the environmental chambers 
atmospheric temperature was verified using a secondary thermocouple (7), 
instrumentation of which could also be used to measure humidity levels. Specimen 
diameter readings were recorded through a laser micrometer system (6). 
Figure 3.3: Schematic of the custom developed experimentation rig.  
1 2 6 
Figure 3.4:  Custom developed pressure-diameter rig. 
With reference to figure 3.4, further details are provided here on the equipment 
used:  
(1) Cole-Parmer dual-syringe infusion/withdrawal pump model 74900-20. The 
Cole-Parmer syringe pump was used for infusion and withdrawal of the pbs 
solution into the specimen. A secondary pump was on standby in the event 
of excessive leaking rates. The Cole-Parmer syringe driver allowed for flow 
accuracies within .5% of specified values.  
(2) An additional in-line syringe was installed. The syringe was typically used 
during initial infusion. During initial infusion, air within the specimen was  
vented through a valve and replaced with the heated buffer solution.  
(3) Grant Optima
TX150 high-performance programmemable digital heating 
circulator. The heating element was placed in a water bath, the 
temperature of which was held between 50
C and 55
C. The temperature 
was varied within this range according to that needed to achieve an in 
specimen solution temperature of 37
C. The fluid line that passed through 
the heated water bath was approximately 1500 mm in length.  
(4) Digitron Digital 2020P7 pressure meter. Suitable for testing in high humidity 
and temperatures levels. 
(5) Specimens were fixed to the rig using a number of custom designed fittings 
ranging from 14 to 46 mm in diameter, in 2 mm increments, the drawings of 
which are provided in appendix 2. The fittings chosen were those that had 
the same approximate diameter of the artery vessel when pressurised to 
100 mmHg.  The large range of fittings insured minimal fixture distortion 
and fittings points.  
(6) Keyence LS-3100 laser scan micrometer. The scanning heads, with a 
sensitivity of .001 mm, were placed within the environmental chamber. 
During prolonged experimental procedures icepacks were placed on top of 
the laser heads to avoid overheating. The laser micrometer was fully 
calibrated using United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS) accredited 
calibration blocks.  
(7) Secondary thermometer and humidity meter for verification purposes. 
(8) Air heater operated using a West 3200 single loop controller. A flexible 
Type-K thermocouple was placed next to the specimen during testing. 
(9)  Digitron Digital 2029T Thermometer and flexible Type-K thermocouple. The 
thermocouple was fed through fittings and placed inside the specimen 
during experimentation.  
As listed, three thermocouples were used within the test setup. Only when readings 
from these three apparatus converged within a 2
C (36.0 to 38.0
C) envelope did 
experimentation take place. During protocol development, a second analogue 
pressure meter was also used to verify pressure readings and the correct operation 
of equipment involved. Placing the heated water bath inside the sealed 
environmental chamber ensured that humidity levels within the chamber remained 
above 70%.  
3.2.3 Proximal ring devices 
Proximal rings commissioned for this project were identical to those used in 3rd 
generation Anacondas. As with the fresh nature of biological tissue requested, ring 
devices used during deployment simulations had to be pre-manufactured before 
specimens could be received.  
To ensure correct oversizing of specimens ranging from 17.5 to 31 mm lumen 
diameters, seven different sized proximal rings were commissioned.  For each of 
these ring sizes, three different Lutz numbers (1.3, 0.9, and 0.5) were commissioned 
by adjusting wire diameter and the number of turns from which each consisted.  
The Lutz number, as expressed in equation 3.2 and derived in appendix 5, is a 
method used by Vascutek to define ring stiffness, first proposed by Prof Karl-Lutz 
Lauterjung, inventor of the Anaconda ring stent design.  
The requirement for different ring strengths was driven by FE model validation 
requirements as illustrated in figure 3.5 which displays the typical behaviour of an 
artery during pressurisation. As can be seen, during pressurisation, increasing 
pressure tends to yield smaller displacement increments. For FE model validation 
purposes, during device deployment it was beneficial to generate displacements 
close to the plateau whilst avoiding straying onto it. If deployment simulations were 
carried out within regions of the plateau, comparison of deformations to FE results 
would be less effective in ascertaining the accuracy of the FE simulation. It was, 
however, useful to operate as near to the plateau as possible, as again, for 
validation purposes, it was beneficial for the ring, not the internal pressure, to be 
the dominant deformation force.   
All devices commissioned for this study are summarised in table 3.1. The table 
provides device details and introduces a naming convention adhered to for the rest 
of this thesis. The table also summarises vessel compatibility for each device used. 
An example of the devices used is provided in figure 3.6. 
                              (3.2) 
Figure 3.5: Pressure-Diameter response of a rat mesenteric artery obtain from Ref [92]. The 
initial response of the tissue tends to be elastic, with increased pressurisation leading to 
diminishing displacement increments.  
Figure 3.6:  R_23 Lutz 1.3 commissioned for the vascular testing programme. Nitinol wire was 
wound from a straight drawn condition into a bundle and sutured onto knitted polyester graft 
fabric material using 1mm suture spacing.  Four eyelets, manufactured from nylon, were added 
to the design to allow for deployment.   
Eyelets Sutures  Polyester fabric Nitinol wire bundle 
Intraluminal Pressure (mmHg) 
Table 3.1: List of devices commissioned for the vascular testing programme. The table contains 
all critical dimensions and specifies ring-specimen compatibility. 
Ring devices were manufactured by Terumo Vascutek, by the same technicians 
whom manufacture Anaconda devices. Anaconda device manufacturing protocols 
were used when suturing Nitinol wire bundles onto knitted polyester fabric 
(typically 1.0 mm spacing between sutures). The Nitinol used in the construction of 
these devices, was again, identical to that used for the Anaconda device (Fort 
Wayne, Niti#1, Super-Elastic Straight Annealed with etched surface). 
Device 
outer 
diameter 
Ring No. 
Compatible 
Vessel 
Diameter 
No. of 
turns 
Bundle 
Diameter 
Theoretical 
Inner 
Diameter 
Flat Ring 
Diameter 
Flat Ring 
Outer 
Diameter 
Lutz Ring 
Number 
(from 
Inner D) Min Max 
R_21 Lutz 1.3 17.50 19.50 0.18 9.00 0.69 19.70 20.39 21.09 1.24 
R_21 Lutz 0.9 17.50 19.50 0.18 7.00 0.54 19.70 20.24 20.78 0.96 
R_21 Lutz 0.5 17.50 19.50 0.18 4.00 0.31 19.70 20.01 20.32 0.55 
R_23 Lutz 1.3 19.50 21.00 0.18 13.00 1.00 21.70 22.70 23.71 1.34 
R_23 Lutz 0.9 19.50 21.00 0.18 9.00 0.69 21.70 22.39 23.09 0.92 
R_23 Lutz 0.5 19.50 21.00 0.18 5.00 0.39 21.70 22.09 22.47 0.51 
R_25 Lutz 1.3 21.00 23.00 0.20 11.00 0.94 23.70 24.64 25.59 1.32 
R_25 Lutz 0.9 21.00 23.00 0.20 8.00 0.69 23.70 24.39 25.07 0.96 
R_25 Lutz 0.5 21.00 23.00 0.20 4.00 0.34 23.70 24.04 24.39 0.48 
R_28 Lutz 1.3 23.00 25.00 0.22 10.00 0.94 25.70 26.64 27.59 1.38 
R_28 Lutz 0.9 23.00 25.00 0.22 7.00 0.66 25.70 26.36 27.02 0.97 
R_28 Lutz 0.5 23.00 25.00 0.22 4.00 0.38 25.70 26.08 26.45 0.55 
R_30 Lutz 1.3 25.00 27.50 0.22 12.00 1.13 27.70 28.83 29.96 1.32 
R_30 Lutz 0.9 25.00 27.50 0.22 8.00 0.75 27.70 28.45 29.21 0.88 
R_30 Lutz 0.5 25.00 27.50 0.22 5.00 0.47 27.70 28.17 28.64 0.55 
R_32 Lutz 1.3 26.50 29.00 0.22 14.00 1.32 29.70 31.02 32.34 1.25 
R_32 Lutz 0.9 26.50 29.00 0.22 10.00 0.94 29.70 30.64 31.59 0.89 
R_32 Lutz 0.5 26.50 29.00 0.22 6.00 0.57 29.70 30.27 30.83 0.54 
R_34 Lutz 1.3 28.50 31.00 0.24 12.00 1.24 31.70 32.94 34.17 1.25 
R_34 Lutz 0.9 28.50 31.00 0.24 9.00 0.93 31.70 32.63 33.55 0.94 
R_34 Lutz 0.5 28.50 31.00 0.24 5.00 0.51 31.70 32.21 32.73 0.52 
3.2.4 Anaconda delivery system 
During protocol development for the vascular testing programme, deployment of 
the ring device into the artery was found to be problematic.  The main difficulties 
were associated with deployment of the device into a suitable position whilst 
maintaining stability. Once in a suitable position, the device also had to be 
manipulated into a quarter symmetric shape to meet in situ and FE modelling 
assumptions.  
To overcome these issues, the author, alongside Mr David Stevenson Head of 
Innovation at Vascutek, modified a 1st generation Anaconda delivery system for the 
delivery of single proximal rings. The delivery system, as seen in figure 3.7, allowed 
for the compaction of the device into catheter-like diameters, manipulation of the 
device into position, and deployment of the device. Through a series of tethering 
wires, the device could be redeployed as necessary until in a satisfactory position 
and orientation. Once the device was deployed, the tethers could be removed and 
the delivery system could be extracted. Throughout the deployment process, focus 
was placed on replicating the load history that the ring would experience in 
practice.   
Figure 3.7: Adapted Anaconda device delivery head. Tethering wires were looped through the 
nylon eyelets, allowing for compaction into sheath-like diameters. The delivery head was used to 
place the device into a suitable position. Once in position, the tethering wires were slowly 
removed, expanding the device.  
3.3 Protocol  
This section of the thesis will outline the protocol that was adhered to during the 
Vascular testing programme. The protocol was established through comprehensive 
experimentation with porcine specimens. Only when the protocol was fully verified 
were human specimens acquired for the presented work. The protocol was 
independently scrutinised by Dr Philip Riches (Department of Biomedical 
Engineering, The University of Strathclyde) a licensed practitioner in human 
anatomy and dissection.    
3.3.1 Specimen acquisition and preparation 
An agreement was set in place with Biopta Ltd, a company that specialises in the 
acquisition of human vascular tissue. The agreement was subject to an ethical 
review by an internal body within Biopta and the University of Strathclydes own 
ethical review board.  
An agreement was set in place for three abdominal specimens, each specimen 
being defined as the aortic tissue between the diaphragm and the aortic bifurcation 
as shown in figure 3.8. In accordance to characterisation studies [93][95], all 
characterisation experiments were done within 48 hours of specimen extraction. 
Patient data on age, sex and relevant medical records were supplied with every 
sample provided. From the moment of extraction specimens were kept in a 
phosphate buffered solution (pH 7.4) at 4
On reception, the specimen was dissected into two regions as shown in figure 3.9.  
Region ABT.1 was identified as the region spanning axially 30 mm above the 
superior mesenteric artery, whilst region ABT.2 was identified as the region 
between the lower renal artery and the aortic bifurcation. Excessive perivascular 
tissue was removed by Biopta staff members.  
Through an axial incision through sample ABT.1, a rectangular patch was produced. 
This patch was then separated into its three wall layer constituents using a 
microscope, scalpel and tweezers. Once each of the layers was separated, the 
microscope was used to identify any damage caused by the procedure. Tissue 
samples with excessive damage or visible disease were rejected from later 
characterisation work.  
Layer separation work was conducted by a trained Biopta staff member after 
developing their techniques using bovine specimens.   
Figure 3.8: Labelled human aortic system 
Figure 3.9: Preparation requirements for experimental work.  
3.3.2 Experimental procedures 
This section will summarise experimental procedures as used during the testing.  
3.3.2.1 Uniaxial experimentation procedures 
1. Surfaces were sterilised and necessary equipment gathered. 
2. The Bose 3200 was prepared and fitted with a heated (37
C) water bath. 
3. The DVE was installed as shown in figure 3.10. 
4. Four Specimens, two in an axial and two in the circumferential direction, were 
produced from each arterial layer. Each specimen measured roughly 40 mm in 
length and 5 mm in width.  
5. Excess moisture was removed from the sample using absorbent paper. Five 
markers were placed on each sample. Small sections of emery paper were glued 
to the edges of each sample to minimise slipping once clamped. Care was taken 
not to affect the gauge length which was defined by the edges of the paper.   
6. The sample was then placed into the Bose 3200 rig and left to equilibrate for 20 
minutes before executing the actuator waveform, as shown in figure 3.2.  
7. The waveform could be adjusted to optimise for the specimens specific gauge 
length and stress-strain response.   
8. Detailed measurements of sample length, width, and gauge length were 
recorded using a digital vernier caliper. 
Figure 3.10: Left, Bose 3200 test setup for uniaxial charaterisation. Right, prepared porcine 
protocol development specimen.  
3.3.2.2 Pressure-diameter and deployment procedures 
1. The inflation rig was prepared through filling syringes with a calcium free pbs 
solution. Air and water heaters were used to set the environmental chamber 
temperature to 37
C. During protocol, development high humidity levels were 
found to help keep specimens hydrated. Care was therefore taken to ensure 
that the humidity levels rose above 70% before work commenced. 
2. Tubular sample ABT.2 was inspected for features and arterial disease. A careful 
note of the specimens condition and detailed geometric measurements were 
taken.  
3. To allow for pressurisation, all major branching vessels were plugged and 
sutured. Branching vessels were plugged using resin, taking care as to not affect 
gauge sections. Cotton balls or absorbent paper towels were additionally used 
for larger branching vessels to minimise leaking.  
4. The tubular section was then fixed onto the rig at 15% axial stretch and filled 
with the saline solution using syringe drivers.  
5. Leaking rates were checked before allowing the specimen to equilibrate for 30 
minutes. Specimens were occasionally damped using a spray bottle containing a 
heated buffer solution.  
6. Once equilibrated for 20 minutes, the specimen was subjected to 15 training 
cycles, in which internal pressure was varied between 0 and 160 mmHg, at an 
approximate rate of 2 mmHg/per second 
7. With leaking through small branching vessels and capillary beds inevitable, 
syringe drivers were refilled as necessary.   
8. Using the laser micrometer, pressure-diameter readings were recorded at two 
locations: the location where the proximal ring device was to be deployed and 
the other just distal of the inferior mesenteric artery.   
9. The vessel was removed from the rig and the chosen device was deployed. The 
device choice was based on the ring size which would give a Ring/Vessel 
diameter oversize of between 10 to 20%. The rings Lutz number was based on 
vessel compliance as measured during pressurisation.  
10.  The vessel was reattached to the rig with a 15% axial stretch and allowed to 
equilibrate for 10 minutes.  
11. After five training cycles, deformations imparted by the ring were captured 
using the laser micrometer at pressures of 0, 60, 80, 100 and 120 mmHg. The 
recording process involved noting vessel diameter measurements at 1 mm axial 
increments and then repeating the process at various angles of rotation. 
Through this methodology a 3D deformation map was obtained as illustrated in 
figure 3.11. As specifics regarding data collection were dependant on a host of 
factors such as the nature of arterial surface features, details regarding the data 
collected will be provided per specimen in section 3.4. 
Figure 3.11: Process capability outline for 3D reconstruction of deformed specimens. Data 
points were obtained during testing (a). These data points could then be imported into CAD 
software for the generation of a surface (b). Created models could then be imported into FE 
software for mesh development and load applications (c).  
(a) (b) (c) 
3.4 Results 
Results presented here illustrates major findings of the testing program and 
represents the data used for FE modelling purposes. Data for all specimens tested 
can be found appendix 3.  
3.4.1 Specimen 1  
Table 3.2 summarises specimen 1s donor information. These details are provided 
here due to their potential influence on vascular mechanics. With a study of the 
cause of death, medical history and medication, only diabetes was highlighted as 
having a possible impact on vascular mechanics as it has been shown to lead to 
stiffening of the arterial wall [96]. Due to the patients relatively young age, this 
was, however, only a minor concern.  On first appearance, the specimen seemed 
healthy with only a slight irregular shape below the inferior mesenteric artery, as 
shown in figure 3.12.  
Table 3.2: Specimen 1s donor information 
Age 43 
Sex Female 
Race Caucasian 
Height 1.61 Meters 
Weight  102 kg 
Cause of Death Intraparenchymal haemorrhage 
Medical History Factor 5 Leiden deficiency, diabetes for 14 years 
starting as gestational diabetes. Diverticulitis for 4 years 
Medications Glucophage, Coumadin, Paxil, vitamin B12, Cipro for UTI 
2 weeks prior to admission 
Figure 3.12:  Image of specimen 1. Aortic features were identified as follows: aortic bifurcation 
(a), inferior mesenteric artery (b), renal artery (c), superior mesenteric artery (d) and finally the 
celiac trunk (e). Irregular narrowing of the aorta was noted (f). Notations 1 and 2 point towards 
locations at which pressure-diameter readings were obtained.  
a b c d e f 1 2 
3.4.1.1 Separation of individual layers 
On receipt of specimen 1, the donors young age raised concerns about the layer 
separation process. Studies have found that in young patients the intimal layer can 
be thin [73]. This was thought could lead to the intima tearing during separation. 
Indeed, as can be seen in figure 3.13, layer separation was difficult with tearing 
unavoidable. Tearing generally occurred around arterial features, such as small 
branching vessels, leaving only small patches useable for uniaxial characterisation. 
Once identified, medial and adventitial layers separated without any difficulty.  
A much larger number of branching vessels were encountered within the ABT.1 
sample region than what was expected. This was seen as a patient specific variation. 
Separation of layers did, however, confirm that the section was relatively healthy 
with no significant disease noted.  
Figure 3.13:  Specimen 1s arterial layers separated. Layers were identified as the intima (a), the 
media (b) and adventitia (c). The intimal layer was damaged during separation whilst the media 
and adventitia separated with more ease. Holes within the layers are the location at which 
branching vessels were removed.  
a b c 
3.4.1.2 Layer-specific uniaxial results 
With arterial layers separated, the protocol as defined in section 3.4 of this report 
was followed to obtain uniaxial stress-strain results. Due to the difficulties 
encountered during intimal separation, only two uniaxial samples could be 
harvested from this layer (one circumferential and one axial).  
Figure 3.14 depicts stress-strain (engineering) results obtained from each layer 
characterised. The results are comparable in nature to other publications 
addressing the stress-strain properties of vascular tissue [72]. In contrast to other 
published studies, which report nonlinear stiffening around 12%,  was the elastic 
nature of the intima which was seen to stiffen between 20 and 30%.  
With reference to the limited data available, the response of the intima is 
commonly dominated by collagen alignment at low strain values. The elastic 
response of specimen 1's intima can be linked to the patients age and relative 
health of the samples tested. Intimal thickening is common with age, with the layer 
becoming more mechanically significant with time. The results can therefore be 
explained when noting that most of the abdominal aorta data available for 
comparison in the literature are from much older donors. Furthermore, results 
shown here are topographically site specific, for which no published stress-strain 
data exists.  Until further data becomes available on the mechanical variability 
across aortic regions, little value can be placed in direct comparison against other 
studies.    
Specimen's 1 intimal layer was very thin in nature. It should be noted that surface 
damage, due to layer separation, could also have had an impact on the results. 
Although microscopic studies of the samples suggested minimal detectable damage, 
tears and voids created during the separation process were unavoidable.  The 
results shown in figure 3.14 confirm the highly orthotropic nature of vascular tissue, 
and emphasises the need for a layer-specific approach to vascular FE modelling.    
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
Strain (%)  
Intima Axial Intima Circumferential 
Media Axial Media Circumferential 
Adventitia Axial Adventitia Circumferential 
Figure 3.14:  Specimen 1s uniaxial characterisation results expressed in Engineering stress and 
strain.  
3.4.1.3 Pressure diameter 
Pressure diameter readings were obtained from two locations on specimen 1 ABT.2. 
One of these was below the renal arteries, at the location at which the device would 
be implanted, and the other, 1.5 cm above the bifurcation (figure 3.15). Although 
the specimen at first appearance seemed irregular in shape as shown in figure 3.12, 
it tended towards a uniformly cylindrical shape when stretched to 15% and fitted to 
the rig.  
For pressurization, branching vessels such as the renal and inferior mesenteric 
arteries were tied. Where pressurisation resulted in excessive leaking, an additional 
paper plug was inserted into the branching vessel as shown in figure 3.15. Care was 
taken not to affect the gauge section.   
Figure 3.15:  Image of a renal artery with paper plug inserted. An  adhesive was used to keep 
the plug in place.  
14.00 
14.50 
15.00 
15.50 
16.00 
16.50 
17.00 
17.50 
18.00 
18.50 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 
Pressure (mmHg) 
Below Renals Above Bifrucation 
Figure 3.16 shows the pressure-diameter results obtained from location 1 and 2. As 
can be seen from this figure, a nonlinear pressure-diameter response was obtained, 
typical of soft tissue under increasing deformation.   
Using  equation 3.3  to calculate compliance as proposed by Langewouter et al. [97], 
compliance figures of 2.88 and 3.42 were obtained for location 1 and 2 respectively.  
          (3.3) 
Figure 3.16:  Pressure diameter results for specimen 1. A nonlinear relationship was established, 
typical for that of biological tissue under increased deformation.  
3.4.1.4 Deployment simulation 
For deployment, device R_21_Lutz_1.3 was chosen from table 3.1. A full set of data 
points were extracted which characterised the deformations at the three pressures 
0, 80 and 140 mmHg, results of which is shown in figure 3.17. The process of device 
deployment was challenging. The single ring configuration within this particular test 
was highly unstable during deployment and pressurisation. Leaking became an issue 
at larger pressures, resulting in several attempts to obtain data points. Figure 3.17 
represents a section of the specimen tested, where the baseline for the axial 
measurements were taken to be from the bottom fitting. Fittings induced negligible 
distortion, close to connection end points.   
-20 -10 0 10 20 
External Diameter (mm) 
R_21 Lutz 1.3 at 80 mmHg 
R_21 Lutz 1.3 at 140 mmHg 
Unpressurised 
-50 0 50 
R_21 Lutz 1.3 at 80 mmHg 
R_21 Lutz 1.3 at 0 mmHg 
Unpressurised 
-20 -10 0 10 20 
External Diameter (mm) 
An observation made from results presented here is that there was no significant 
change in deformation imparted by the ring during pressurisation from 0 mmHg to 
80 mmHg. This indicated that the ring deformed the vessel to diameters noted 
within the physiologic pressure range (80 mmHg to 120 mmHg) once implanted.   
Further pressurisation to 140 mmHg deformed the vessel to a cylindrical form, at 
which point, deformations imparted by the ring were minimal. 
Figure 3.17: Edge profile results for device R_21 Lutz 1.3 deployed at pressure 0, 80 and 140 
mmHg. 
Illustrated Ring 
(a) (b) 
Figure 3.18 (b) is a plot of the peak-to-peak compliance over a range of pressures. 
The results shown here depict an initial, unpressurised deformation of 19.7 mm 
which increases gradually to 19.8 mm at 80 mmHg. Here, the diameter was seen to 
increase rapidly to 20.15 mm at 120 mmHg. The highest peak-to-peak deformation 
was measured at 20.17 mm at 130 mmHg, at which point an inflection was noticed.  
The initial, unresponsive stage seen in figure 3.18 was a function of the device being 
the dominant deformation force. With the pressure continuing to increase, point A 
marks the stage where the pressure became significant and induced further 
deformations. The inflection point B is thought to be unique to the ring's saddle 
shape. With the ring deployed, the vessel takes on a non-circular form. At point B 
the internal pressure deformed the vessel into a cylindrical shape, reducing peak-to-
peak deformations.  
The results shown in figure 3.18 supports the choice of device used during the 
experimental work. As seen in figure 3.18 (b), point A coincides very well with 
diastolic pressures, whilst point B coincides well with systolic pressures. During 
service this property would be beneficial to the performance of the proximal ring so 
as not to impede hemodynamics. The small window of operation can also be seen 
where the two inflection points narrowly encapsulate the physiological range. This 
highlights the challenges faced by design engineers and the need for advanced 
design tools.  
The peak-to-peak deformation and its variation with pressure are closely linked to 
the maximum strain experienced by the device and therefore the mechanism that 
induces fatigue in situ. Figure 3.18 (b) is therefore central to the design challenges 
that companies such as Vascutek face and as such is critical to the work herein.  
0 30 60 90 120 150 180 
Internal Pressure (mmHg) 
Figure 3.18 (a): Peak-to-peak deformations coincide with the maximum deformations imparted 
by the ring compacted into a saddle shape. 
Figure 3.18 (b): Peak-to-peak deformations over a range of pressures. Deformations were 
obtained for a comprehensive pressure range, extending from 0 mmHg to 158 mmHg.  
Inflection point B within this study was not expected and was thought to be associated with the 
complex interactions of the rings unique saddle shape and the vascular wall.  
Peak-to-peak deformations imparted 
3.4.2 Specimen 2 data 
Table 3.3 summarises donor 2s patient information. From a study of the patients 
medical history, hypertension was seen as being most relevant to the mechanical 
properties of the specimen received. Synthroid, a drug often used in the treatment 
of hypothyroidism, was listed as a prescribed medication alongside Prilosec which is 
commonly used in the treatment of pyrosis. Neither of these drugs has been 
reported as having a significant influence on the mechanical properties of vascular 
tissue.  Significant lipid deposits were found around the SMA and celiac trunk as 
shown in figure 3.19. These were removed along with excess perivascular tissue.  As 
can be seen in figure 3.19, specimen 2 seemed discoloured on receipt, a condition 
thought to be associated with liver disease listed within the patients medical 
records. 
Table 3.3: Specimen 2s donor information 
Age 61 
Sex Male 
Race Caucasian 
Height 1.80 Meters 
Weight  113 kg 
Cause of Death End-Stage Liver Disease 
Medical History Hypertension for 3 years, Hypothyroidism, Alcohol 
abuse for 40 years, chronic back pain, Rotator cuff 
surgery, knee surgery, Achilles tendon surgery, liver 
disease due to alcohol abuse. 
Medications Synthroid, Prilosec 
Figure 3.19: Image of specimen 2. Aortic features were identified as follows, aortic bifurcation 
(a), inferior mesenteric artery (b), renal artery (c), superior mesenteric artery (d). Notations 1 
and 2 point towards the locations at which pressure-diameter readings were obtained. 
a b c d 1 2 
3.4.2.1 Separation of layers  
Layer separation followed protocol as outlined in section 3.2 of this thesis. In 
general the process was less problematic than found for specimen 1. The relative 
ease at which layers were separated was attributed to the patients age. Although 
tearing of the intimal layer was still an issue, enough of the specimen could be 
salvaged to extract two specimens in both axial and circumferential directions.   
In contrast to specimen 1, very little branching vessels were noted within the region 
dissected as can be seen in figure 3.20. With this, large areas of media and 
adventitia layers were available for characterisation.   
Figure 3.20: Separated layers of specimen 2. Layers were identified as the intima (a), the media 
(b) and the adventitia (c). Each of the three layers was subject to yellowish discoloration 
attributed to end stage liver disease.  
a b c 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 
Strain (%, Engineering) 
Intima Axial Intima Circumferential 
Media Axial Media Circumferential 
Adventitia Axial Adventitia Circumferential 
3.4.2.2 Layer-specific results 
For stress-strain specimen characterisation, two specimens per direction, per layer, 
were obtained, representative results of which are shown in figure 3.21. Further 
data produced through testing can be found in appendix 3. As can be seen from the 
figure, highly anisotropic trends were noticed for the intimal and adventitial layers. 
Although still nonlinear, the medial samples tended to behave in a more isotropic 
manner. Data displayed similar patterns to that obtained for specimen 1, with only 
results obtained for the adventitia being notably stiffer.  
Figure 3.21: Specimen 2s layer-specific stress-strain data.  
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 
Pressure (mmHg) 
Below Renals Above Bifrucation 
3.4.2.3 Pressure-diameter results 
Pressure-diameter results were obtained from two locations. These locations were 
1.5 cm below the renals and 1.5 cm above the aortic bifurcation. Results presented 
in figure 3.22 display a distinct nonlinear relationship, consistent with that of 
collagen recruitment theories [69], [70].   
Using Langewouter's compliance calculations as per equation 3.3, a compliance 
value of 1.85 was calculated for the region below the renals, whilst a figure of 1.09 
was obtained for the region just above the bifurcation. The relatively low 
compliance figures obtained were attributed to the severe calcifications noted upon 
further dissection of the tubular specimen (figure 3.23).  
Figure 3.22: Specimen 2s pressure diameter results 
Figure 3.23:  Specimen 2s ABT.2 section further dissected. Severe calcifications were noted 
upon further dissection, disease that was thought to have influenced pressure-diameter results.  
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 
Pressure (mmHg) 
Without Device R_25 Lutz 1.3 R_23 Lutz 1.3 
3.4.2.4 Deployment simulation 
When pressurised to 100 mmHg, specimen two's diameter was measured to be 
20.95 mm, 10 mm distal to the renal arteries. With the transition point of R_23.5 
and R_25.5 being 21 mm, this meant that for the purposes of ideal over sizing it lay 
between two device sizes.  For this reason both devices were deployed in turn. 
Within figure 3.24, peak-to-peak results have been overlaid onto the pressure-
diameter graph of the same region. It can be seen that R_25 Lutz 1.3 resulted in an 
initial peak-to-peak value of 21.99 mm. As this value was above the natural plateau 
level for the vessel at that location, pressurisation resulted in a decrease in peak-to-
peak displacement. This behaviour is not reported in the literature and supports 
findings made through specimen 1. Results for device R_23 were more conventional 
which resulted in a Langewouter compliance of 0.58.    
Figure 3.24:  Peak-to-peak deployment results for both R_25 Lutz 1.3 and R_23 Lutz 1.3 being 
deployed below the renal arteries.  
3.4.2.5 Profile readings 
In general, leaking rates were less problematic than experienced for specimen 1. 
This meant that profile readings could be obtained for both R_23 Lutz 1.3 and R_25 
Lutz 1.3 devices at a range of pressures. Results for these devices at pressures of 0 
and 80 mmHg are presented in figure 3.25. 
Results for R_23 Lutz 1.3 are as expected, with pressurisation of the vessel resulting 
in the vessel, initially only being deformed by the ring, taking on a more uniform 
cylindrical shape. It is worth noting that the region around the ring, and hence the 
ring itself, only underwent a small change in deformation during pressurisation, 
with the bulk of the deformation occurring proximal and distal to this region. These 
findings are consistent with the results shown in figure 3.24 which indicate only a 1 
mm increase in diameter between the 0 to 150 mmHg pressure range tested for 
R_23 Luz 1.3.  
Results presented within figure 3.25 (b) are more intuitive in nature. Due to the 
larger oversize of the device, the vessel initially deforms to a greater extent. These 
increased deformations are seen to extend past the region of implant. As a result of 
these deformations imparted by the device, the vessel experiences little further 
deformation during pressurisation. The deformation that does occur does so by 
reshaping the vessel to its cylindrical form to best accommodate pressure forces. 
Through this process the peak-to-peak deformation decreases, essentially causing 
an unintuitive negative dilation within this region. Once in its cylindrical form, 
further pressurisation would cause conventional dilation. Results shown in figure 
3.25 are in agreement to those shown in figure 3.24. 
-20 -10 0 10 20 
Displacement from centreline (mm) 
R_25 Lutz 1.3 at 0 mmHg 
R_25 Lutz 1.3 at 80mmHg 
Without Device 0 mmHg 
-20 -10 0 10 20 
Displacement from centreline (mm) 
R_23 Lutz 1.3 at 0 mmHg 
R_23 Lutz 1.3 at 80 mmHg 
Without Device 0 mmHg 
Figure 3.25: Edge profile results for specimen 2 for device R_23 Lutz 1.3 (a) and R_ 25 Lutz 1.3 
(a) (b) 
Illustrated device 
3.4.3 Specimen 3 data 
Donor information for specimen 3 is provided in table 3.4. As can be seen, the male 
fell within the ideal age range of 56-65 years old. Hypertension and diabetes were 
listed within the medical history, and from details provided, are the most likely to 
have an impact on the mechanical properties of vascular tissue. Figure 3.26 is an 
image of the vessel as received. Large lipidic deposits were noticed around the 
celiac trunk whilst an abnormal dilation was observed towards the aortic 
bifurcation. Regions below the renal arteries seemed to be in relatively good health, 
with no visible signs of disease.  
Table 3.4: Specimen 3s donor information. 
Age 56 
Sex Male 
Race African American 
Height 1.87 Meters 
Weight  106.6 kg 
Cause of Death Pulmonary Embolism 
Medical History Corneal Transplant, diabetes, keratoconus disorder, 
diabetic ketoacidosis, hypertension, elevated 
haematocrit, mild thrombocytopenia 
Medications None 
Figure 3.26: Image of specimen 3. Arterial features were identified as the aortic bifurcation (a), 
the inferior mesenteric artery (b), the renal artery (c) and the superior mesenteric artery (d). 
The abnormal dilation (e) was noticed just above the aortic bifurcation. Notations 1,  2 and 3 
point towards locations at which pressure-diameter readings were obtained. 
(a) (b) (c) (d) 
(e) (3) 
3.4.3.1 Specimen 3 layer separation  
Layer dissection for specimen 3 was unfortunately much more problematic than for 
either specimens 1 or 2. Arterial layers seemed more fragile, especially the media, 
leading to tearing during separation. An image of the dissected layers is provided in 
figure 3.27, where laceration-like damage is noticeable on the medial sample. 
Lacerations seemed to be predominantly in the circumferential direction, perhaps 
pertaining to the dominant direction of collagen found in this layer.  
Figure 3.27: Separated layers of specimen 3. Layers were identified as the intima (a), the media 
(b) and the adventitia (c). The intima again was subject to arterial disease seen within the image 
as discoloration. The fibrous nature can clearly be seen, with two branching vessels visible as 
holes within the layer. 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
Strain (%, Engineering) 
Intima Axial Intima Circumferential 
Media Axial Media Circumferential 
Adventitia Axial Adventitia Circumferential 
3.4.3.2  Layer-specific uniaxial results 
Considerable difficulties were encountered in the process of characterising 
specimen 3s medial layer. Test specimens tended to be fragile in nature with 
tearing a problem at low levels of stress and strain. In spite of these issues two 
uniaxial samples, one axial and one circumferential, were successfully characterised. 
The adventitia and intima presented fewer issues and as a result, two specimens 
per direction were successfully characterised. Results of uniaxial tests are shown in 
figure 3.28. 
As seen from the graph all layers, especially the adventitia, displayed highly 
anisotropic behaviour. Intimal layers were the least compliant, whilst the adventitial 
layers were the most. The medial sample of specimen 3 behaved in a more 
pronounced anisotropic manner than what was noticed for both specimens 1 and 2.  
Figure 3.28:  Specimen 3s uniaxial characterisation results.  
3.4.3.3 Pressure-diameter results 
Through closer inspection of specimen 3, the dilatation noticed in section 3.4.3 of 
this report appeared to be the early stages of a type 1 aneurysm (figure 3.29). 
Although not an original objective of this work, this presented the opportunity to 
obtain rare in vitro pressure-diameter data for such a region. The defined locality of 
the diseased tissue also meant that data collected could directly be compared 
against non-diseased sections. To this authors knowledge, no such data is yet 
available within the published literature. 
After experimentation, examination of the vessels surface revealed distinct signs of 
atherosclerosis. Interestingly, no thrombosistic formation was observed within the 
aneurysm sack, a condition often associated with aneurysm pathology [4]. With no 
visible signs of external damage, proteolytic degradation of elastic and collagen 
fibres was seen as the most likely cause of the aneurysm. Such reasoning would be 
supported by the fragile nature of the specimens tested. 
Figure 3.30 displays the results of pressure-diameter experiments conducted. 
Regions below the renal arteries, away from the aneurysm sack, were the most 
compliant with a Langewouter compliance of 3.14. This compliance then reduced in 
regions towards the aneurysm, which itself had a compliance of 2.53.  
Figure 3.29:  Early stage aneurysm.  
Vessel dilatation 
Atherosclerosis 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 
Pressure  (mmHg) 
Below Renals Above Aneurysm Aneurysm Sack 
Results presented in figure 3.30 indicate that diseased regions became non-
compliant at pressures far below that of physiological diastolic pressures. The non-
compliance of diseased regions is thought to be an effect of elastin degradation and 
collagen synthesisation. Healthier regions below the renal arteries displayed more 
conventional characteristics, with stiffening noted at around 100 mmHg. 
Figure 3.30:  Pressure-diameter results obtained for specimen 3.   
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 
Pressure (mmHg) 
Without Device R_25 Lutz 1.3 R_25 Lutz 0.9 R_25 Lutz 0.50 
3.4.3.4 Specimen 3 device deployment 
With a lumen diameter of 22 mm at 100 mmHg pressure, three R_25 devices of Lutz 
number 1.3, 0.9 and 0.5 were deployed within specimen 3. As with specimens 1 and 
2, peak-to-peak deformations were compared against pressure-diameter results of 
the same location, the results of which are shown in figure 3.31.  
As can be seen from the graph, due to the relatively high compliance of the vessel, 
devices of Lutz numbers 1.3 and 0.9 deformed the vessel past its natural plateau 
level. With pressurisation, peak-to-peak deformations of devices 1.3 and 0.9 did not 
tend back to the natural plateau levels. R_25 Lutz 0.5 allowed for the vessel to 
behave in a more natural manner, with the peak-to-peak diameters tending to the 
unassisted pressurisation curve at a pressure higher than 60 mmHg. With R_25 Lutz 
0.5 deployed, a Langewouter compliance of 2.36 was calculated.  
Figure 3.31: Deployment results for three different R_25 strengths overlaid onto relevant 
pressure-diameter results.  
-20 -10 0 10 20 
External Diameter (mm) 
R_25 Lutz 1.3 at 0 mmhg 
R_23 Lutz 0.9 at 0 mmHg 
Without Device 
-20 -10 0 10 20 
External Diameter (mm) 
R_25 Lutz 1.3 at 140 mmHg 
R_25 Lutz 1.3 at 0 mmHg 
Without Device 
3.4.3.6 Profile readings 
In figure 3.32 (a), deformation results are shown for ring devices Lutz 1.3 and 0.9 at 
0 mmHg. Results indicate, as would be expected, that the stiffer device produces 
larger deformations around contact areas. Distal to the deployment location, the 
stiffer device induced a slight narrowing within the vessel. Figure 3.32 (b) displays 
profile edge results obtained for Lutz 1.3 at pressures of 0 mmHg and 140 mmHg. In 
this figure, the considerable deformation of the vessel is seen away from 
deployment locations. A slight decrease in peak-to-peak diameter can be noted as 
the vessel is pressurised to 140 mmHg and the vessel deforms to a more uniform 
cylindrical shape.  
Figure 3.32:  Edge profile readings of deployment simulations.  
Illustrated device 
3.5 Vascular programme data analysis 
In this section data obtained from the vascular testing programme is collated, 
further analysed and compared against data available from the published literature.  
3.5.1 Uniaxial tensile tests comparison 
As discussed in section 2.3.2.6, layer-specific abdominal data has previously been 
published in the form of Holzapfel parameters by Weisbecker et al., [72]. An 
opportunity therefore exists to collate and compare published results against 
characterisation work conducted herein. Results of this study are shown in figure 
3.33 through to 3.38 which compare uniaxial tensile results for all three layers 
characterised. For clarity, only the most and least stiff arterial responses from  
Weisbecker's study are used for comparison.  
Within the study conducted by Weisbecker, specimens were obtained from the 
region between the renal arteries and aortic bifurcation. As specimens within this 
body of work were obtained from the region just proximal to the renal arteries, 
comparison of results shed light on the variability of the mechanical properties 
across the abdominal aorta. Furthermore, the comparison also provided an 
understanding of the effects that major branching vessels have on the properties of 
specimens.  
Within figure 3.33 and 3.34, the comparison of intimal results are presented. 
Results obtained from the vascular characterisation programme largely enveloped 
that of data obtained from Weisbecker. A distinct pattern emerged, with arterial 
hardening with age clearly prevalent. The relative stiff nature of specimen 2 was 
thought to be related to the donors medical conditions which included 
hypertension. The severe discoloration of specimen 2 also suggests that alcohol 
abuse could have had an impact on vascular mechanics. With the health issues 
noted for specimen 2, and considering that a similar age range was characterised 
within the compared publication, results obtained from the vascular testing 
programme were thought to be on average more compliant. This finding is 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
Strain (%) 
Intima Specimen 1 Intima Specimen 2 Intima Specimen 3 
Weisbecker XI Weisbecker XIII 
consistent with known global trends of the increased arterial compliance towards 
the heart.  
Figure 3.35 and 3.36 displays the comparison of medial results against 
Weisbecker's. As seen, results produced herein were consistent with those found in 
the literature, with results produced tending towards being marginally more 
compliant in nature. As the media is a mechanically significant layer, dominating the 
arterial response at low levels of deformation, this finding is significant.   
Comparison between figures 3.33 and 3.35 displays the relative difference in 
response between the media and intima. The comparison highlights the large 
scatter in results obtained for the intima which displayed non-linear stiffening 
anywhere between 5% and 27% strain. The inconsistency of results obtained from 
this layer was attributed to its susceptibility to disease. As a whole, the medias 
response was more compliant in nature. 
The comparison of adventitia results is shown in figure 3.37 and 3.38. In general, 
axial results seemed to be in good agreement with those found within 
Weisbecker's. Circumferential data for specimen 1 and 3 were outside the envelope 
of results obtained from Weisbecker's study, being highly elastic in nature.  
Figure 3.33:  Intima axial stress-strain results in comparison to those obtained from Weisbecker 
et al., [72]. 
Patient age 61 
Patient age 43 Patient age 56 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 
Strain (%) 
Intima Specimen 1 Intima Specimen 2 Intima Specimen 3 
Weisbecker IX Holzapfel XIII 
Figure 3.34:  Intima circumferential stress-strain results in comparison to those obtained from 
Weisbecker et al., [72]. 
Figure 3.35:  Medial axial stress-strain results in comparison to those obtained from Weisbecker 
et al., [72]. 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 
Strain (%) 
Media Specimen 1 Media Specimen 2 Media Specimen 3 
Weisbecker I Weisbecker XVII 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 
Strain (%) 
Adventitia Specimen 1 Adventitia Specimen 2 Adventitia Specimen 3 
Weisbecker I Weiskbecker V 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 
Strain (%) 
Media Specimen 1 Media Specimen 2 Media Specimen 3 
Media XIII Media XIV 
Figure 3.36:  Medial circumferential stress-strain results in comparison to those obtained from 
Weisbecker et al., [72]. 
Figure 3.37:  Adventitia axial stress-strain results in comparison to those obtained from 
Weisbecker et al., [72]. 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
Strain (%) 
Adventitia Specimen 1 Adventitia Specimen 3 Adventitia Specimen 2 
Holzapfel XVI Holzapfel V 
Figure 3.38:  Adventitia circumferential stress-strain results in comparison to those obtained 
from Weisbecker et al., [72]. 
3.5.2 Pressure-diameter comparison  
For further analysis, efforts were made to establish how representative specimens 
were of their individual age brackets. For this, pressure-diameter compliance data 
produced herein was compared against data published by Langewouter et al., [97].   
Within the referenced publication, pressure-diameter characteristics for 20 
abdominal aortas are provided. The programme objectives were aimed at 
characterising the abdominal aorta within its basal state, following protocol 
analogous to ones adopted herein. Data within this publication is presented in the 
form of Langewouter's parameters (equation 3.3), a format that this project also 
adopted. 
The comparison of data collected herein against that published by Langewouters, et 
al. is presented within figure 3.39. A global trend of a decrease in compliance with 
increasing age was once again established when plotting results. Using a 3rd order 
polynomial line of best fit within figure 3.39 for reference, specimens 1, 2 and 3 was 
seen to conform to trends with  reasonable agreement to Langwouter's data. 
Specimen 1's compliance, as calculated in section 3.4.1.3, was especially seen to be 
30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
Patient Age (in years) 
Langewouters data Specimen 1 Specimen 2 Specimen 3 
in good agreement. This correlation of biaxial data provided evidence that specimen 
1 was representative of other patients of similar age. 
Specimen 2's compliance, as calculated in section 3.4.2.3, generally compared low 
against published data. This was thought to be related to the highly inelastic results 
obtained for its intimal layer during uniaxial characterisation (figure 3.33 and 3.34). 
This finding provided evidence of the mechanical significance of the intima in older 
specimens. This is in contrast against many studies in which this layer is disregarded 
due to its relative thickness when compared to the media and adventitia. 
Specimen 3's results, as calculated in section 3.4.3.3, showed the most variation. 
Regions characterised below the renal arteries displayed much higher levels of 
compliance than would be expected for specimens of that age. In contrast, the 
region just proximal to the aortic bifurcation displayed relatively low levels of 
compliance. Compliance data obtained for the aneurysm sack also fell just above 
that which would be expected for healthy tissue. 
Figure 3.39:  Comparison of data collected herein as compared against data available within 
literature [97] for the abdominal aorta.    
Below renal arteries 
Aneurysm  
Above aortic bifurcation 
Above aortic bifurcation 
3.6 Chapter summary 
This chapter produced the comprehensive data sets required for both soft tissue 
material model development and FE validation. Following this, a summary of data 
was presented for three human cadaver specimens characterised using the 
developed protocol. 
The work presented the first attempt at site specific characterisation across 
multiple specimens. With this, the data produced from this study could be used in 
conjunction with site unspecific studies to address a range of academic questions. 
Two of these questions addressed were the mechanical variability of vascular tissue 
in the presence of major branching vessels and the consistency of properties across 
the abdominal aortic region. Results shown in section 3.4.1 provided compelling 
evidence that, mechanically, trends of increasing elasticity towards the heart 
remain consistent even in the presence of arterial features. This finding is significant 
as it allows the use of characterisation data obtained from uniform cylindrical 
sections for the development of material models. These models can then be used in 
non-uniform, feature intense sections with a greater degree of confidence and 
understanding. During studies, the intima displayed the greatest variability in 
mechanical properties, a finding ascribed to the susceptibility of this layer to arterial 
disease. The difficulties associated with the separation of this layer from the media 
are also thought to be a factor. 
 To this author's knowledge, no single publication exists in which specimens were 
subjected to comprehensive uniaxial layer-specific, biaxial and non-uniform out of 
plane characterisation. As comprehensive data sets are crucial for the adequate FE 
modelling of arterial tissue, the data sets produced herein were seen as a much 
needed development within the academic field. By further combining the data sets 
produced with data available within literature (Weisbecker et al., [72]) links were 
developed between previously unconnected studies. Through collating data steps 
have also been taken towards creating statistically significant data sets from which 
averaged properties can be drawn. Generalised properties are essential if FE 
modelling is to be adopted into the heart of endovascular device design. 
Device deployment simulation data presented within this chapter provides a new 
insight into the complexities involved in device/artery interactions. Complex 
interactions captured experimentally provide an excellent benchmark for future FE 
model validation activities.   
In addition to meeting the main objectives of the vascular testing programme, rare, 
early stage type-1 aneurysm pressure-inflation data was obtained. In combination 
with the characterisation data collected for surrounding non-diseased tissue, the 
data collected provides unique information on aneurysm pathology. Along the path 
of completing the programme  a vascular testing capability was established at the 
University of Strathclyde. Protocol required for the testing of arteries was 
developed and recorded through extensive experimentation. With the capability set 
and methods recorded, efforts within this body of work will aid future studies.  
4 Integrated modelling framework development  
Much of the difficulties associated with creating accurate device-artery simulations, 
stem from the asymmetric, nonlinear material models involved. With the Anaconda 
device there is also then the added complexity of contact interactions under large 
deformations. As a result of these challenges, although previous attempts had been 
made [24], a FE design tool had yet to be created which could effectively be used to 
study the interactions between the Anaconda's proximal ring and the arterial wall.   
This chapter provides details on the steps taken within this project to readdress 
these challenges. The difficulties associated with the FE modelling of device/artery 
interactions are presented, and modelling assumptions adopted within the current 
work are clarified. The steps taken within this project to address issues encountered 
by previous authors are also discussed, before further novel modelling 
developments are presented.   
The entire framework was constructed using the high-level, object oriented 
scripting language, Python 3.2. The scripts produced during this project will not be 
presented within this chapter. Instead, concise flow diagrams will be used to convey 
methodology whilst the scripts can be found in Appendix 6. 
 As an independent scripting language, Python includes built-in functionality to deal 
with lists, tuples and dictionaries. The use of Python meant that built-in 
mathematics modules could be utilised, simplifying the process of parameterising. 
Through this, algorithms could be developed for the automatic application of 
boundary conditions. With a built-in Python dictionary within Abaqus, scripts 
produced could also directly be read into the FE platform as input files.  The choice 
of using Abaqus 6.11 as the FE platform was primarily based on the availability of 
bespoke material models for both Nitinol and arterial tissue, as built-in user sub-
routines [48].  
4.1 Finite element challenges and simplifications 
4.1.1 The Anaconda device 
The device as seen in figure 4.1 is relatively intricate. Modelling of the complete 
structure within FEA, although possible, would result in excessively long solutions 
times for even the simplest loading conditions. As most of the body only acts as a 
conduit for blood flow, such a model would also provide large amounts of trivial 
data. Modelling of the complete device was therefore deemed excessive and focus 
was placed on the proximal ring of the device.  
The proximal ring dictates much of its performance. It plays a key role in the 
devices sealing capabilities and is also its primary form of anchorage. With this, and 
the critical nature of the oversize property introduced in chapter 1, a number of 
academic questions could be posed and answered by the FE modelling of its 
interactions with the vessel wall.  Primary of these questions were the strain the 
proximal ring experienced in situ and the force exerted by the ring onto the arterial 
wall once implanted.  
As the polyester fabric onto which the device is sutured has been shown to be 
mechanically insignificant [24], it was omitted from modelling efforts. This vastly 
simplifies modelling efforts with negligible impact on ring stiffness as demonstrated 
in the referenced study. 
Figure 4.1: Location and nature of the proximal ring. 
Proximal ring 
Elongated suture 
The proximal ring of the device is made from a single straight drawn Nitinol wire 
(OD of 0.18 to 0.24 mm), which is coiled between seven to fourteen times to form 
the ring. The two ends of the wire strand are crimped and contained within an 
elongated suture which can be seen in figure 4.1. Once coiled, the wire bundle can 
take a number of different configurations, with stable configurations for a 12 turn 
bundle illustrated in figure 4.2 [24]. During deformation these turns interact with 
each other, presenting complex FE contact modelling difficulties. To address these 
difficulties, a simplification has previously been proposed in which the ring bundle is 
replaced by a single, thicker ring with identical stiffness properties [24], a method 
referred to as the "Equivalent-I" approach. This approach assumes that wire turns 
behave independently and hence, the second moment of area of the entire ring 
bundle is simply the second moment of area of an individual wire turn multiplied by 
number of turns within the bundle. When attempting to capture the stiffness 
characteristics of the proximal ring, the wire bundle can hence through this method 
be replaced by a single thicker wire of equivalent second moment of area. Although 
seen as significant, this Equivalent-I ring-modelling simplification was adopted 
during initial framework development. Novel bundle modelling methods are later 
proposed in section 6.2.   
As the proximal ring is formed from straight drawn wire, ring bundles are in a state 
of constant strain once sutured onto the polyester fabric. This property is referred 
to as the pre-strain of ring bundles and has a significant influence on the 
behaviour of the device. Capturing pre-strain effectively was a major challenge 
within the present study.  
Figure 4.2: Stable turn configurations are shown for a 12 turn wire bundle. Coloured turns 
demonstrate the varied positions three consecutive turns can assume around the bundle.  
4.1.2 Vessel challenges and simplifications 
Various simplifications and assumptions were required to make the FE study of 
device/artery interactions feasible. As the most prominent simplification, the vessel 
was modelled in free space, meaning that interactions between the aorta and 
surrounding organs were omitted from study. This simplification is standard within 
many Finite Element stent studies, and is the only realistic option with current 
computing capabilities.   
From chapter 2, it can be seen that significant effort was made to introduce a 
representative vascular model. It should be noted, however, that even the most 
sophisticated arterial constitutive models currently available are still, for the most 
part, phenomenological.  
Within this project, as in most preceding studies, the artery was assumed to be 
uniform and cylindrical in shape. Furthermore, branch vessels and other irregular 
arterial features were omitted from modelling efforts. This simplification stemmed 
from the considerable patient-to-patient variations which exist.  
Following from the conditions under which vascular tissue was characterised in 
chapter 2, all tissue was modelled within its basal condition. This meant that the 
active muscular response was omitted from modelling efforts. This simplification 
was deemed suitable with reference to section 2.3.6, where it was shown that such 
a modelling approach would be appropriate for highly elastic arteries.  
For material model development, characterisation data from non-diseased tissue 
was used. This assumption was generally consistent with medical procedures during 
which healthy tissue is identified and in which the device is subsequently anchored.   
4.2 Integrated modelling framework development approach  
In section 2.4 of this thesis, relevant studies to the one conducted herein were 
reviewed. Of particular interest was a study conducted by McCummiskey [24], 
which had similar objectives to this project. Although a valued academic 
contribution, a number of issues were encountered regarding robustness, 
computational expense and accuracy. 
The approach taken within this project was to initially follow the work conducted by 
McCummiskey, borrowing from the approach established and addressing core 
issues encountered. Once these issues were addressed, further work focussed on 
the introduction of novel modelling techniques and the implementation of a 
bespoke arterial model.  
For structure, the model developed will be presented per simulation phase as 
follows:  
1. Forming of the proximal ring from straight drawn wire 
2. Compressing the device into the sheath  
3. Delivery of the device within the vessel   
4. Deploying the device 
The modelling methods adopted will be compared against previous attempts, 
highlighting progress achieved by this study.   
4.2.1 Ring forming from wire in straight drawn condition 
There were several methods by which the pre-strain within the ring could be 
obtained, with the use of thermal gradients being the most common within the 
existing literature. Through this method, thermal expansion and contraction is used 
to replicate strain states. For this particular study however, Nitinols distinct 
temperature dependence made the use of thermal gradients inappropriate. 
Although Nitinols mechanical properties could be made to be temperature 
independent within the Aurichio material sub-routine, such a modelling step would 
have to come with the reassurance that future iterations of the framework would 
not want to take thermal effects into account. Without these reassurances, the 
simulation of a displacement-based method was favoured within this project.   
Although a displacement method was chosen, care was taken to avoid complex 
contact conditions. Instead, a parametric algorithm was favoured that could directly 
enforce displacement vectors on nodes.  
After adopting a quarter symmetric modelling approach, a process was developed 
whereby the straight drawn wire was slowly displaced into a semi-circular shape.  
This was at first achieved by employing incremental displacements on nodes, which 
was made to coincide with the centreline of the wire. By calculating the theoretical 
final position of each centreline node, displacement vectors could be specified and 
the wire made to converge onto the semi-circular shape. Although this process 
showed promise, the over-constrained nature of the employed boundary conditions 
led to robustness issues. Another concern was that shear effects resulted in planar 
sections of the wire not being normal to the axis of rotation. To compensate for this 
effect, an additional load step was incorporated to ensure the correct orientation of 
the wire ends. Within this additional load step, final nodal positions of the two faces 
were corrected using planar surface constraints. As seen in figure 4.3, this method 
yielded exceptionally good results with the additional load step ensuring a uniform 
stress-strain distribution across the entire arc. The FE analysis as shown in figure 4.3 
used C3D20R elements to represent a 24 mm OD proximal ring, with wire thickness 
of 0.18 mm. Validation procedures are presented in chapter 5.  
Figure 4.3:  Stress contours seen at the quarter symmetric interface. 
Von Mises Stress (MPa) 
Quarter symmetric interface 
With it shown that a uniform stress-strain distribution could be achieved using 
displacement techniques, further work regarding pre-strain modelling focused on 
the reduction of the computational expense involved with the pre-strain phase. For 
this purpose further development focused on the removal of excessive boundary 
conditions.  
A technique was developed by which wire faces were made to be perpendicular 
with the xz and yz planes. Using this condition alone as the system constraints, as 
shown in figure 4.4, the wire would tend to a perfect arc. This condition set was also 
consistent with the quarter symmetry model approach. By making the conditions a 
function of nodal positions after mesh generation, the script was made to be fully 
parametric. The technique worked exceptionally well and as such was incorporated 
into the final framework.  
Figure 4.4: Positioning of the straight drawn wire within the global coordinate system with 
boundary conditions applied. Boundary conditions were set to constrain wire faces towards the 
XZ and YZ planes as indicated.  
Boundary conditions 
placed on nodes 
Orientation of 
drawn wire within 
the global 
coordinate system 
4.2.2 Compaction of wire 
In practice the Anaconda is compacted into a sheath by pulling it through a conical 
device into a highly compacted saddle shape. Once in the sheath, it is delivered 
directly into the patient via minimally invasive surgery. As an emphasis was placed 
within this study on capturing all major loading events, modelling efforts were 
made to represent this phase of the devices lifecycle. 
In previous studies [24], partial compaction of the ring was achieved through a 
series of displacement boundary conditions placed on the wire's neutral axis. 
Concerns over this method were raised during this study when it was found that the 
wire twists around its centreline during compaction.   
In this study, to allow for the wire to freely rotate around its centreline,  
displacement boundary conditions used to compact the wire were placed on a 
single central node within each wire face (as indicated by the white arrow in figure 
4.5). Although placing a displacement boundary condition on a single node could be 
regarded as poor FE modelling practice (as this has the potential for creating 
unwanted stress concentrations), the method yielded physically intuitive results as 
presented in figure 4.5. The FE analysis as shown in figure 4.5 used C3D20R 
elements to represent a 24.0 mm OD proximal ring with a wire thickness of 0.18 
mm. A mesh convergence study is shown in figure 4.6. Recognising that analyses are 
only conducted up to 20% oversize, results indicated that, increasing the through 
thickness mesh density above twelve elements yielded little change in results.  
Figure 4.5: Through thickness stress distribution of the wire compacted down to 65% oversize.  
Von Mises Stress (MPa) 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 
Number of elements through thickness 
Results at 20% Oversize Results at 40% Oversize 
Figure 4.6: Convergence on results with increased mesh density for a R_28 device.  
 4.2.3 Delivery of system 
In an attempt to reduce computational cost, care was taken not to include any load 
steps which could be deemed unnecessary. For this reason, the proximal ring was 
compacted in position at its delivery site, removing the need to manipulate the ring 
into position once compacted, as was previously done [24].  
To achieve this, contact conditions were eliminated during the initial stages of the 
simulation. With this, the wire would simply form through the vessel wall as seen in 
figure 4.7. In position, the proximal ring could be released at which point contact 
conditions were invoked, initiating interactions between the artery and device.  
Although physically unintuitive, this modelling method has no influence on the final 
FE simulation results.  
Figure 4.7: Compaction phase of the wire. With no delivery phase the wire was modelled 
already in position. The ring was then formed and compacted through the vessel wall. Once 
compacted, boundary definitions were invoked and the device deployed within the vessel.   
4.3 Further developments 
Section 4.2 summarised the initial development of the python script framework that 
could be used to study device-artery interactions. The approach taken within this 
thesis to build upon previous projects led to a stable, computationally efficient 
baseline, to which further developments could be introduced. Further 
developments fell into two categories:  the introduction of a beam element model; 
and the introduction of a more representative arterial model.  
4.3.1 Introduction of a beam element proximal ring model  
Initial development of the framework utilised C3D20 continuum elements for 
proximal ring representation.  Although these elements produced detailed through 
thickness results, they were relatively computationally expensive when compared 
against beam elements (Abaqus B32H [48]). For this reason, an additional script was 
introduced (Appendix 6.3), which could be used to replace the C3D20 elements with 
B32H elements at any point during the pre-processing phase. The beam element 
model was redeveloped using the modelling principles as established in its 
Vessel Wall 
Compacting wire 
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 
Beam Element Lenght (mm) 
Results at 20% Oversize Results at 40% Oversize 
continuum counterpart. With this, boundary conditions during the forming phase 
forced wire ends to become perpendicular to the XZ and YZ planes as illustrated in 
figure 4.9. Compaction and deployment were done through boundary conditions 
equivalent to that of the continuum representation, displacing the wire ends along 
the Z axis with displacement boundary conditions.  
Beam element theory rests on a number of simplifications and assumptions. These 
assumptions have in the past been based upon slender beam assumptions. As a 
result, they have in the past been limited in their ability to account for large bending 
deformations. New technology that allows for large out of plane deformations and 
nonlinear shear, such as the Timoshenko formulation, was used in this study.  
Validation of the beam element approach to this particular application is shown in 
chapter 5 of this thesis. Mesh convergence studies indicated that increasing the 
beam element density below 0.35 mm, yielded no significant change in results for 
both the 20% and 40% oversize conditions (figure 4.8). The beam element script 
was produced as an add-on, which meant that it sat as an additional script that 
could be used during pre-processing. The script worked by editing the model 
assembly, replacing the continuum representation with the beam element 
approach. Through the use of beam elements a significant reduction in 
computational expense was achieved. The development of a beam element 
representation was a valuable contribution to the framework and a precursor to the 
development of the multi-turn proximal ring model.   
Figure 4.8: Convergence on results with increased mesh density for a R_28 device 
Figure 4.9: Illustration of beam element ring formation.   
4.3.2 Vessel modelling 
Previous attempts at capturing device/artery interactions have included severely 
compromised arterial models as discussed in section 2.3. To this extent, the 
incorporation of a comprehensive arterial model into the integrated modelling 
framework was seen as  one of this projects biggest contributions. A considerable 
amount of effort was therefore invested in the development of a credible vascular 
representation.   
This section will first outline the finite element modelling approach adopted for the 
representation of the artery. An overview of the python script produced for the 
arterial models incorporation into the framework, will also be presented. Once the 
modelling methods are outlined, the procedures used to obtain artery material 
parameters will be clarified.  Validation studies for any of the derived models work, 
is discussed in chapter 5.  
Un-deformed shape 
Deformed shape 
4.3.2.1 Development of the arterial model 
Development of a vessel model followed the simplifications and assumptions 
outlined in section 4.1.2 of this report. With this, the arterial wall was modelled as a 
quarter cylindrical vessel.   
The media and adventitia were meshed using quadratic, hexahedral elements with 
hybrid and reduced integration formulations (Abaqus reference: C3D20RH).  The 
use of quadratic elements was needed to cope with large deformations, whilst the 
hybrid formulation was required for the incompressible material involved. 
Laminated shell and other idealised forms of representation were not considered 
during this work. This was because such forms of representation are not validated 
in Abaqus 6.11 documentation for use when employing Holzapfel's formulation 
[48]. Idealised forms of representations are however appropriate for other 
Hyperelastic formulations, such as the Fung Model, and exploration of their use, are 
therefore suggested as a recommendation for further work in section 7.3. 
During ring deployment, the use of quadratic hexahedral elements resulted in 
robustness issues during contact initiation. Furthermore, once contact had been 
established, element distortion was problematic. To address these issues, the 
intima was modelled using linear tetrahedral elements with a hybrid formulation 
(C3D4H).  This approach vastly improved the robustness of simulations and reduced 
their computational cost.  
As C3D4H elements had the potential of over-predicting stiffness due to bend 
locking, their use within the framework was explored through mesh studies 
presented in figures 4.10 and 4.11. Within these figures, stress and stiffness results 
from two otherwise identical vessels are compared (OD of 28.00 mm and thickness 
of 1.43 mm with Abaqus Holzapfel parameters < .01, 0.0, 0.22, 13.42, 0.135 >). 
Figure 4.10 demonstrates that similar stress distributions were obtained when using 
tetrahedral opposed to hexahedral elements, with agreement of maximum Von 
Mises stresses within 2.1%. This agreement came despite the discontinuity of using 
linear and non-linear elements, as Abaqus 6.11 automatically reduced the non-
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 
Pressure  (mmHg) 
Nonlinear Tetraheral Intima 4 Nonlinear Hexahedral Elements 
Linear Tetrahedral Intima 8 Nonlinear Hexahedral Elements 
linear hexahedral boundary edge to be linear. Figure 4.11 displays pressure-
diameter results, demonstrating that near identical stiffness characteristics were 
obtained through both approaches. Within this graph, a comparison is also made 
against a vessel model using an increased mesh density of eight C3D20RH elements 
through thickness. This comparison indicates that mesh convergence had been 
reached for the vessel with the combination of tetrahedral and hexahedral 
elements shown in figure 4.10. 
Figure 4.10: Stress distributions for arterial vessels where the intima is modelled using hexagonal 
(a) and tetrahedral elements (b)  in a 220 mmHg pressurised simulation.   
Figure 4.11: Pressure-Diameter results of vessel using various mesh representations. 
Von Mises Stress (MPa) 
Von Mises Stress (MPa) 
Figure 4.12 (c) displays the boundary set employed. Standard symmetric conditions 
were set on marked surfaces whilst an axial boundary condition was used to 
simulate in situ stretches (10-15%). As seen from the image, internal pressure was 
directly applied to the inner surface of the vessel wall.  
Cartesian material orientations were assigned per element, with a projection 
parallel with the axis of the vessel, a projection tangential to the circumference of 
the vessel, and a 3rd projection perpendicular to vessel's central axis. The model as 
shown in figure 4.12 was parameterised and scripted within Python (Appendix 6.4). 
Within the script a choice of material models is provided for users. The material 
models ranged from near rigid condition, linear elastic models to the Holzapfel 
arterial material model. Material parameters used to particularise the linear elastic 
model were user-defined per simulation run whilst the Holzapfel parameters are 
derived in section 4.3.2.2 from data presented in chapter 5.  
Figure 4.12: Quarter symmetrical representation of the arterial wall. The vessel wall is 
comprised of a basic cylindrical shape (a). This cylinder was sectioned into three discrete 
regions to form 3 arterial layers (b). Boundary conditions were placed as required to apply axial 
stretches and internal pressures (c). Material orientations were then applied, as required for soft 
tissue modelling (d).  
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
4.3.2.2 Arterial material model development 
Embedded within the Holzpafel [89] constitutive model are five material 
parameters which fit it to a given data set . A host of different methods can be used 
for the derivation of these parameters. The method best suited is largely dependent 
on the experimental data sets available. Herein, as would be the case in many cases 
within industries, uniaxial material data was available. 
Holzapfel [67] proposed an approach which could be used for the determination of 
parameters from uniaxial data sets. An outline of this approach will be presented 
within this section. Following this, the approach will be applied to the data sets 
produced through the vascular testing programme. It should be noted that modern 
FE suites, such as Abaqus 6.11-2, have built-in curve fitting applications, resulting 
parameters of which are provided in table 4.2. These applications disguise the 
underlying assumptions of constitutive relations and a very limited number can fit 
anisotropic hyper-elastic data sets. For these reasons,  both methods were used 
within this study.     
For further details on the mathematical derivations interested readers can refer to 
[98], [73] and [90].  
Outline of the approach 
Uniaxial data is often not sufficient to determine multi-dimensional models. The 
reason is that these experiments do not cover the same strain domain as might be 
explored during simulation. As a result of fitting multi-dimensional models to 
uniaxial data, convergence issues could be encountered. Ideally then the free 
energy function as introduced in section 2.2.6 should be fitted against biaxial data. 
This was however not possible with current University of Strathclyde capabilities, a 
complication experienced by many end users within industry. 
With these issues noted, Holzapfel [67] suggests a technique whereby physical and 
structural related constraints are imposed on the free energy function in such a way 
that it can be fitted against uniaxial data. Using additional data from histology 
examinations, further constraints are placed on parameters so that, in addition to 
providing satisfactory uniaxial results, parameters also provide adequate multi-axial 
convergence.  
To follow this approach by Holzapfel, the free energy function is modified for 
uniaxial test conditions. Partial derivatives of the function are then taken with 
respect to the in-plane strain directions (    is assumed to be zero), giving 
components of Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor. If strain values are taken from the 
experimental tests, analytically calculated stress values can then be compared 
against those predicted by the modified function. Using this comparison, through a 
least square analysis optimization technique, the energy function can be fitted 
against the data sets and the material parameters extracted.  
Derivation of parameters 
Recalling the basic expression for the free energy first presented in section 2.3.10.2, 
it was shown that the total helmholtz free energy ( )  can be expressed in terms of 
its isotropic        and orthotropic (      ) free energy contributions as stated in 
equation 4.1. 
                                                                     (4.1) 
This general expression can be particularised through an appreciation of the test 
setup used within the vascular testing programme. During the vascular testing 
programme two rectangular strips were harvested per arterial layer, one aligned in 
the axial      direction of the aorta and the other in the circumferential 
direction     . As with the test setup, the Green-Lagrange strain tensor (   and 
   ) are components of strain that were directly supplied by the Video 
Extensometer. From the Green-Lagrange strain tensor, the Piola-Kirchoff stress 
tensor could be deduced of which the transverse components are near zero (with 
reference to the tensile axis). This provides the first of the constraints which can be 
placed on the associated strain-energy function as analytically, the experimental 
paths must cross in a location at which the transverse components of the second 
Piola-Kirchoff tensor vanish. Applying this kinematic constraint to equation 4.1 and 
assuming incompressibility it can be shown that the isotropic and orthotropic 
components can in turn be expressed as:   
                          (4.2) 
                               (4.3) 
In the above expressions  ,  ,             are parameters that fully define the 
materials behaviour. It is these parameters which the data fitting process aims to 
retrieve.  
In order to derive meaningful parameters, another constraint can be introduced 
whereby the parameters chosen must be such that the second derivative of the 
strain energy function with respect to      and    , is positive. This ensures that 
contours of constant strain energy values are convex when projected onto a 
         plane. The property of "convexity" is an important attribute required for 
numerical solver implementation [99] .  
This property of local convexity can be achieved when the exponential term in 
equation 4.3 is set to a constant value, as shown below in equation 4.4. 
                        (4.4) 
Equation 4.4 is in a quadratic form and as such can be rewritten in matrix form with 
eigenvalues       of the Hessian matrix as shown in equation 4.5 
                    (4.5) 
If the requirement exists that the Hessian matrix is positive definite, as it is for 
implementation into FE [99], then the inequality of equation 4.6 can be assumed. 
                                                                     (4.6) 
This inequality dictates that both     and     are either positive or negative. For 
results to make physical sense however both these parameters must be positive 
[89].  
Study into parameter     reveals another constraint. For all stress components to 
be positive during biaxial extension and negative for biaxial compression, parameter 
     must be positive. Holzapfel also further relates parameter     to mean collagen 
orientations through an appreciation of its relationship with the slope eigenvector. 
Constraints to be imposed onto any parameters derived using this approach could 
be summarised as shown through equations 4.7 and 4.8  
                                                   (4.7) 
                                                                     (4.8) 
The total strain energy is based on two terms referring in part to orthotropic and 
isotropic contributions. The inequality constraints that are discussed within this 
section only relate to the orthotropic component. With this, the shear type 
parameter   is yet to be addressed. In accordance with an assumption adopted by 
previous studies [100], this thesis assumed that the isotropic contributions 
dominate the initial linear elastic response noted during tensile testing. With this 
assumption, the parameter   can be fitted independently using a truncated stress-
strain curve. In this study, parameter   was fitted against these truncated sets using 
a damped-least square method. The method is a well established method for curve 
fitting problems [101].  
Fitting results 
Curve fitting procedures outlined by Holzapfel [67] were completed within 
Microsoft Excel 2010. Results obtained by following this process are shown in table 
4.1 for all specimens, with the accuracy of fits displayed through the coefficient of 
determination "R
To illustrate the effectiveness of these parameters, figures 4.13 through to 4.18 are 
presented which demonstrate the ability of the constitutive model, and the 
parameters derived, to replicate experimental data. Within these figures relevant 
experimental results are compared against the constitutive model's predictions 
which are presented per isotropic and orthotropic contribution. Doing so reveals 
the inner workings of the model and the relative dominance between elastin and 
collagen during mechanical straining.   
Table 4.1:  Summation of material parameters obtained through following curve fitting 
procedures outlined in section 4.3.2.2. 
Specimen 1 
Intima 10.46 8.66 14.5 .0004 .0090 0.96 
Media 6.72 7.76 5.03 .0047 .0095 0.93 
Adventitia 5.34 3.76 6.91 .0028 .0019 0.91 
Specimen 2 
Intima 8.45 8.24 7.14 .0046 .0084 0.97 
Media 6.14 7.42 5.34 .0042 .0094 0.92 
Adventitia 6.71 4.42 5.01 .0037 .0084 0.91 
Specimen 3 
Intima 8.21 7.94 7.43 .0042 .0089 0.93 
Media 6.14 7.21 5.24 .0041 .0084 0.96 
Adventitia 3.12 3.42 6.18 .0031 .0023 0.98 
Table 4.2:  Summation of material parameters obtained through following curve fitting 
procedures in Abaqus 6.11 [48]. Validation of these parameters are presented in chapter 5. 
 k k1 k2    R
Specimen 1 
Intima 0.140 0.389 27.25 47.1 0.006 0.91 
Media 0.120 0.145 5.58 44.2 0.091 0.93 
Adventitia 0.142 0.046 4.68 51.7 0.003 0.92 
Specimen 2 
Intima 0.228 35.42 10.62 49.1 0.025 0.93 
Media 0.135 0.220 13.42 45.8 0.010 0.89 
Adventitia 0.080 0.035 28.41 52.9 0.012 0.91 
Specimen 3 
Intima 0.170 0.728 20.94 47.6 0.014 0.93 
Media 0.009 0.219 8.77 42.9 0.010 0.94 
Adventitia 0.210 0.110 7.40 59.6 0.001 0.93 
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 
Strain (%) 
Experimental Results Orthotropic Contribution Isotropic Contribution 
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 
Strain (%) 
Experimental Results Orthotropic Contribution Isotropic Contribution 
Figure 4.13:  Fitting results for specimen 1s axial intimal data.  
Figure 4.14:  Fitting results for specimen 1s circumferential intimal data. 
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 
Strain (%) 
Experimental Results Orthotropic Contribution Isotropic Contribution 
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 
Strain (%) 
Experimental Results Orthotropic Contribution Isotropic Contributions 
Figure 4.15:  Fittings results for specimen 1s axial medial data.  
Figure 4.16:  Fitting results for specimen 1s circumferential medial data.  
0.000 
0.005 
0.010 
0.015 
0.020 
0.025 
0.030 
0.035 
0.040 
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 
Strain (%) 
Experimental Data Orthotropic Contribution Isotropic Contribution 
0.000 
0.005 
0.010 
0.015 
0.020 
0.025 
0.030 
0.035 
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 
Strain (%) 
Experimental Data Orthotropic Contribution Isotropic Contribution 
Figure 4.17:  Fitting results for specimen 1s axial adventitia data.  
Figure 4.18:  Fitting results for specimen 1s circumferential adventitia data.  
4.3.3 Auricchio Nitinol material model 
In this study, the Auricchio Nitinol material model was implemented as a built in 
user-subroutine [48]. The model requires 15 parameters to be particularised to a 
given data set. These parameters are deduced through a straightforward process 
during which key stages of the material's stress-strain response are used as 
parameter inputs. For further information regarding this method, and for the 
physical meaning of parameters, please refer to appendix 4. The Nitinol wire used 
within the Anaconda device is supplied by Fort Wayne Metals. The alloy 
specification is categorised under the product name "Nitinol#1 Super-Elastic 
Straight Annealed". The alloy supplied has an etched (oxide free) surface finish.  
Uniaxial stress-strain results obtained from the supplier for this material are shown 
in figure 4.19. Through following the procedure outlined in appendix 4, 15 
parameters were picked from this response, as shown in table 4.3. These 
parameters were implemented within the endovascular device model, resulting in a 
replication of the stress-strain curve as shown in figure 4.14. A representative 
tensile response were obtained whilst a less accurate compressive response was 
noticed. This is an inherent limitation of the Auricchio constitutive model, the 
accuracy of which is further explored in chapter 5 of this thesis. Further studies 
regarding the accuracy of the Aurrichio model can be found within the literature 
[24]. 
 Table 4.3: Parameters deduced from provided stress-strain results.  
Parameter:              
Units: MPa - MPa - - MPaT
 MPa MPa 
Value: 65800.0 0.435 65800.0 0.435 0.0538 5.74 637 657 
Parameter     
Units: 
C MPaT
 MPa MPa MPa - -  
Value: 0 6.99 327 307 853 0.0538 0  
-2000 
-1800 
-1600 
-1400 
-1200 
-1000 
-0.1 -0.08 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 
Strain 
Tensile Test Compressive Test FEA 
Figure 4.19: Uniaxial stress-strain results for a 1 mm diameter Nitinol specimen undergoing tension and compression at 37
C. Best fit results using the 
Auricchio material model are shown, driven by parameters provided in table 4.3 
4.4 The python script framework    
Sections 4.2 and 4.3 discussed the development of individual constituents required 
to simulate device-artery interactions. Once constituents were developed, they 
were integrated into a viable design structure, which took the form of a framework 
of python scripts.  
4.4.1 Script outlay modelling methodology  
To create a simulation using the framework, a user would simply import a sequence 
of scripts into Abaqus which would then automatically generate an FE study.  A 
number of scripts were available, all of which could be combined in manner of ways 
to create a variety of studies.  The parameters of these studies could be adjusted 
within the scripts to edit model geometry, whilst load conditions could be adjusted 
within Abaqus as per study requirement.    
Each script represented a unique element of the framework, be it a geometric 
feature or load step. By adopting this modular approach the framework was kept 
open for future development as each element could easily be replaced with an 
updated version. With this it should be clear that the framework was developed 
with usability in mind, a starting point on top of which future iterations could easily 
be built. Such an approach was key if the framework was to be viable for both 
academic and industrial application.  
4.4.2 Script framework overview 
The framework was structured into a user-friendly tier structure as presented in 
figure 4.20. Within each one of these tiers a number of scripts existed. An approach 
was outlined by which an end user would move from tier to tier, selecting scripts 
around which to build a specific study. Each tier represented a crucial modelling 
step, outlined as follows:  
Tier 1. Study is named and global parameters are set  (Appendix 6.1). 
a. A single script held all the core parameters required to construct the  
device-artery model. This included geometric properties for the 
vessel and proximal ring. For most basic studies the parameter file 
was the only script that required input from the end user.  
Tier 2. The proximal ring is modelled within Abaqus. 
a. Running the Beam Element script 1 resulted in a beam element 
(B32H) representation of the Nitinol proximal Ring. A simplified 
symmetric representation of the tension/compression curve was 
induced using this script (Appendix 6.3).  
b. Beam Element script 2 (B32H) evoked an asymmetric representation 
of Nitinol (Appendix 6.3). 
c. Continuum script 1, which resulted in continuum elements C3D8R 
being used for ring representation. Using this script, a symmetric 
Nitinol material model was evoked (Appendix 6.2).   
d. Continuum script 2 used quadratic C3D20R elements for ring 
modelling purposes (with reduced integration). The script also 
induced an asymmetric Nitinol material description (Appendix 6.2).  
Tier 3. Artery vessel representation is modelled. 
a. The use of Vessel 1 script resulted in a single layered arterial model. 
The script could be used for a rigid material representation of the 
artery using linear C3D8R elements (Appendix 6.5). 
b. Vessel 2 resulted in a semi-compliant representation of the artery. 
The script created a three layered arterial model, using a user 
defined elastic response (per simulation). This model was not 
validated within this work (Appendix 6.4). 
c. The use of Vessel 3 resulted in the most comprehensive arterial 
model put forward herein. The script modelled a three layered artery 
using the Holzapfel material model representation. Through the use 
of this script the media and adventitia was modelled using C3D20H 
elements, which are continuum based. The intima was modelled 
using linear tetrahedral elements with hybrid formulation C3D4H 
(Appendix 6.4).  
Tier 4. Load steps are created; boundary conditions are calculated and 
applied  (Appendix 6.6). 
a. The Beam Element script within this tier defined all boundary 
conditions required to form the proximal ring from the straight 
drawn condition when using a B32H representation.  
b. The Continuum Element script set established all conditions required 
for the proximal ring when using a C3D8R/C3D20R representation.  
Tier 5. Boundary conditions required for ring compaction are calculated and 
 applied (Appendix 6.7). 
a. A single script was used for all configurations. 
Tier 6. Contact conditions and properties are defined. Load steps used to 
 simulate deployment are created and appropriate boundary 
 conditions are edited (Appendix 6.8).    
a. A single script was required as the contact properties remain 
identical across model variations.  
Tier 7. Scripts were written to facilitate additional pre and post-processing 
 features. Although a number were written, three that will be used at 
 a later stage in this thesis will be outlined here. 
a. An additional script was written which employed a stabilizing 
boundary condition on the centre point of the straight drawn wire. 
The condition is rigid constraint in the Z axis of the global coordinate 
system. The condition was used to avoid rigid body movement during 
ring deployment into a rigid arterial vessel with frictionless contact 
(Appendix 6.9).   
b. An additional script was written which would retrieve the stress-
strain history for a single element over a user specified number of 
load steps (Appendix 6.10). 
c. A script was written which could extract the stress distribution along 
the length of the wire from the Abaquss results database (.odb) 
(Appendix 6.10).  
Figure 4.20:  Structure of framework developed. Scripts were structured in a hierarchical tier 
format, simplifying use.   
4.4.3 Typical simulation overview 
Figures 4.21 and 4.22 displays an Abaqus FE model generated by the integrated 
modelling framework.  Within these figures, key simulation phases are shown being 
ring formation, compaction and subsequent deployment.  
Figure 4.21:  Formation and compaction of the proximal ring.  
Ring Forming  
Ring Compaction 
Figure 4.22:  Image sequence displays the main simulation phases associated with the vessel. 
These are comprised of the application of user-defined pre-stretches, deployment of the 
compacted proximal ring and the cycling of internal pressures.  
Stretches are employed 
Ring is deployed 
In an attempt to further illustrate the robustness and usability of the framework 
created, an Abaqus solution summary is presented in figure 4.23. As can be seen, a 
simulation as illustrated by figures 4.21 and 4.22 could be completed within 31 
minutes using a standard desktop computer (appendix 1). This is in sharp contrast 
to previous studies where analogous simulations took in excess of 6 hours  [24]. 
Running the most comprehensive artery-vessel interaction model, being an 
asymmetric Nitinol model and Holzapfel arterial model, took approximately 130 
minutes.  
Input warning messages as seen in figure 4.23 were generated as the two parts, the 
vessel and proximal ring, were unconnected during the first two stages of the 
simulation. The further 23 error messages can be seen, generated due to failed 
convergence iterations during contact initiation. These errors had no effect on 
overall accuracy of the simulation. 
     ANALYSIS SUMMARY: 
     TOTAL OF        107  INCREMENTS 
                      13  CUTBACKS IN AUTOMATIC INCREMENTATION 
                     368  ITERATIONS INCLUDING CONTACT ITERATIONS IF PRESENT 
                     368  PASSES THROUGH THE EQUATION SOLVER OF WHICH  
                     368  INVOLVE MATRIX DECOMPOSITION, INCLUDING 
                       0  DECOMPOSITION(S) OF THE MASS MATRIX 
                       1  REORDERING OF EQUATIONS TO MINIMIZE WAVEFRONT 
                       0  ADDITIONAL RESIDUAL EVALUATIONS FOR LINE SEARCHES 
                       0  ADDITIONAL OPERATOR EVALUATIONS FOR LINE SEARCHES 
                       2  WARNING MESSAGES DURING USER INPUT PROCESSING 
                      23  WARNING MESSAGES DURING ANALYSIS 
                       0  ANALYSIS WARNINGS ARE NUMERICAL PROBLEM MESSAGES 
     JOB TIME SUMMARY 
       USER TIME (SEC)      =   3797.7     
       SYSTEM TIME (SEC)    =   68.400     
       TOTAL CPU TIME (SEC) =   3782.6     
       WALLCLOCK TIME (SEC) =       1817 
Figure 4.23  Abaqus Analysis Summary produced at the end of a simulation using an 
Asymmetric Nitinol model and semi-compliant arterial model.  
4.5 Chapter summary 
This chapter detailed the development of the integrated modelling framework. 
Work conducted within this chapter stands as a continuation from a previous study 
[24], in which advanced constitutive models were used to study the interactions 
between the Anaconda and a pseudo-arterial model. The work herein addressed  
limitations noted within the referenced study, focusing on the introduction of an 
accurate arterial model.  Care was taken to ensure that simulations remained 
computationally efficient and robust, ensuring that the framework could feasibly be 
used as an industrial tool to study the interactions between endovascular devices 
and the arterial wall.   
Key to the successful development of the integrated modelling framework was the 
modular approach adapted. Through this approach, the framework allowed for 
incremental advances, simplifying the development process. The framework as 
presented, is seen as an excellent base upon which future design tools can be 
based. All python scripts produced during this study can be found with annotations 
in Appendix 6. 
Towards the overall objective of this research project, the development of the 
framework allowed for an assessment to be made on whether advanced hyper-
elastic and super-elastic constitutive models could be used under complex contact 
and loading conditions to simulate the deployment of endovascular devices. 
Through the results presented, it was shown that such simulations are indeed 
feasible, with accuracies as defined in chapter 5.   
5 Validation 
Within this chapter the accuracy of FE simulations is quantified through a series of 
verification and validation steps. These steps are presented per simulation phase, 
addressing each of the load steps associated with a ring deployment simulation.  
By presenting these validation steps the limitations of the framework developed in 
chapter 4 are identified. With the boundaries of the device-artery simulation 
defined, light is shed on the applicability of FE technologies in the proposed context, 
answering several academic questions that were set out to address.   
5.1 Standard device-artery model 
The integrated modelling framework was developed around a concept of flexibility 
to allow for a range of different device-artery interaction studies to be conducted. 
For this reason aspects of mesh density, element type and material representation 
were kept as user inputs, to be defined for each specific study.  This complicated 
the process of validation as a large number of model combinations were possible.  
Within this section this complication is addressed by defining a standard device-
artery model with which all validation studies were completed. Boundary 
conditions, as introduced in chapter 4, were consistent over all device-artery 
simulations and as such only geometric and mesh properties are discussed. 
5.1.1 Continuum wire model 
Four quadratic continuum elements (C3D20R) were used through the wire depth 
(figure 5.1). Each element incorporated 20 nodal points and reduced integration 
points. A seeding policy of 0.05 mm was employed along the length of the wire. This 
seeding approach resulted in 5340 elements per quarter symmetric representation.  
Unless otherwise stated within any validation study presented within this thesis, an 
asymmetric Nitinol material definition as introduced in table 4.3 was used. The 
Equivalent-I modelling approach, as discussed in section 4.1.1, was utilised for all 
studies (wire diameter 0.18 mm) with a ring diameter of 34 mm.  
Figure 5.1: Element mesh used for continuum representations.  
5.1.2 Beam wire model 
A beam element representation of the wire is shown in figure 5.2. A double bias 
seeding policy was adopted, with elements decreasing from 0.2 mm to 0.02 mm in 
size towards quarter symmetric interfaces. This seeding policy was used to insure 
bending deformations did not violate slender beam theory assumptions at the 
peaks and troughs created by the ring's saddle shape. The elements used were 
quadratic in nature (B32H) with seven section points through thickness. Unless 
otherwise stated, an asymmetric Nitinol material definition was used with 
parameters as stated in table 4.3.  
5.1.3 Vessel representation 
Two different element types were used for vessel representation. The intima was 
represented through linear tetrahedral elements (C3D4H), which vastly improved 
contact initiation (Figure 5.3). The media and adventitia were represented through 
standard quadratic hexahedral elements (C3D20R). A seed size of 0.35 mm was 
utilised resulting in 30 000 elements per quarter symmetric representation (based 
on a unpressurised vessel diameter of 25 mm outside diameter and 1.55 mm wall 
thickness). The Holzapfel hyper-elastic material definition was used in all 
simulations, with parameters defined per study. All tetrahedral elements were 
based on a hybrid formulation [48] to accommodate incompressibility assumptions 
made with the Holzapfel material formulation. 
0.05 mm 
12 Elements in plane 
Figure 5.2: Element mesh used for beam representations. 
Figure 5.3: Element mesh used for vessel representations. Four elements were used through the 
thickness of each artery, with section definitions as shown. 
Double bias seeding policy ranging 
from 0.20 mm to 0.02 mm 
Linear Tetrahedral Elements 
Quadratic Hexahedral Elements 
0.35 mm 
Intima 
Media 
Adventitia 
5.2 Ring forming verification 
In practice the proximal ring is manufactured from straight drawn wire which is 
coiled several times to form a ring. Once this ring is formed, it is incorporated into 
the Anaconda device which effectively locks it into a state of constant strain. These 
"pre-strains" are essential to the mechanical performance of the device and as such 
had to be captured within FE modelling activities.  
To capture pre-strains within the FE wire model a novel boundary set was 
developed as detailed in section 4.2. These boundary conditions are validated here 
through the comparison of FE results against analytical methods. This method of 
validation was made possible as it can be shown that the proximal ring remains 
within the linear-elastic material regime during the pre-straining load step. 
Table 5.1 displays this comparison between Von Mises stresses as calculated by 
Abaqus with those obtained using equation 5.1, where E is the first elastic modulus, 
R the radius of curvature and   is the perpendicular distance to neutral axis. The 
table displays the results obtained for ring configurations which envelopes 
Anaconda devices manufactured by Terumo Vascutek. As can be seen from the 
results, the FE modelling methods adopted compared well against analytical 
calculations.  
                                                                             (5.1) 
Table 5.1: Comparison between results obtained through Finite Element Analysis with those 
calculated through analytical methods. 
Diameter 
Diameter 
Analytical 
(MPa)  
Finite Element 
Continuum Results   
Finite Element Beam 
Results  
MPa Difference % MPa Difference % 
0.16 36.5 288.43 299.30 3.70% 288.80 0.12% 
0.22 36.5 396.60 409.84 3.20% 397.04 0.10% 
0.26 36.5 468.71 484.67 3.30% 468.98 0.05% 
0.18 34.0 348.35 361.70 3.80% 348.63 0.05% 
0.18 26.0 475.10 455.53 4.29% 475.80 0.10% 
0.18 18.0 658.09 694.70 5.20% 658.50 0.07% 
5.3 Stress distribution comparisons  
The computational savings brought forward by beam elements make multi-turn 
bundle modelling a potentially viable option.  The development of a multi-turn 
bundle model would remove the need for methods such as the Equivalent-I 
approach adopted herein.  Beam elements (Abaqus B32H) are, however, based on a 
series of slender beam assumptions [48] and care must be taken when using them 
under conditions of large scale, out-of-plane, deformation.  
To demonstrate that beam element assumptions are not violated during device-
artery simulations a study was conducted. This study compared results obtained 
between beam and continuum element ring representations at different stages of a 
deployment simulation. Through agreement of results, it could be shown that beam 
element assumptions held true. In the process of completing this study, an 
additional post-processing script was introduced into the framework. This script, 
made available in Appendix 6.10, could sample the highest recorded value of a 
chosen variable along the length of both solid and wire representations as shown in 
figure 5.4. 
For comparison, identical simulations were constructed using beam and continuum 
representations and the final results were compared. The results are shown in 
figure 5.4 through to 5.6 and were obtained for a single 36.5 mm diameter ring 
(0.22 mm wire diameter) being formed, compacted and deployed. In both cases the 
ring was compacted into a sheath-like diameter (ID 9 mm) and deployed into a rigid 
vessel of ID 30 mm (15% oversize).  
350 355 360 365 370 
375 380 385 390 395 
-16 -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 
Continuum Representation Beam Element Representation 
-16 -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 
Position along wire (mm) 
Figure 5.4 displays the Von Mises Stress distribution along the length of the wire, at 
the end of the ring forming stage. As can be seen, results obtained from both 
representations compared well with a maximum divergence of 4.02 % noted at any 
one location. The results also compared well against the analytical solution of 396 
MPa, following trends witnessed in table 5.1.   
Elevated regions of stress towards the quarter symmetric boundaries for the 
continuum (solid) representation (figure 5.4 a.2) were noted within the results. 
These elevated results were imparted by the boundary conditions required to 
induce quarter symmetry conditions. 
Figure 5.4: Continuum (a) and beam representations (b) for an R_36.5 ring in straight drawn 
condition.  Below, a.2 and b.2, presents the stress distributions along the length of the wire 
obtained for the wire and the end of the ring forming stage.  
(b.2) 
(a.2) 
350 355 360 365 370 
375 380 385 390 395 
-16 -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 
Continuum Representation Beam Element Representation 
-20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 
Position along  the wire (mm) 
Figure 5.5, presents results achieved at the end of pseudo compaction. As can be 
seen from the graph, results were again in good agreement. Although the nodes 
subject to boundary conditions were removed from post-processing, elevated 
regions were noticed for the beam representation, as is indicated within the graph. 
These effects tended to increase with increasing levels of compaction, eluding to a 
breakdown of beam theory assumptions under high sheath-like compaction levels 
(above a 75% reduction in ring diameter).  
Figure 5.5: Stress distribution along the length of the wire at the end of 75% compaction. Under 
these conditions a good correlation between continuum and beam element results was found.   
350 355 360 365 370 
375 380 385 390 395 
-16 -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 16 
Continuum Representation Beam Element Representation 
-20 -15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 
Position along the wire (mm) 
Finally, figure 5.6 displays stress distributions along the ring once deployed. As can 
be seen from this graph, increased divergence was noted between the two 
representations at this stage. The reasons for this divergence were thought to be 
associated with Nitinols hysteretic behaviour and the way this was dealt within the 
element formulation.  
Figure 5.6: Stress distribution once deployed into a 15% oversized vessel. A divergence in 
results was noticed between the two representations under load history conditions.  
5.4 Equivalent-I approach assessment  
In chapter 4 a method, referred to as the Equivalent-I approach, was adopted from 
a previous study [24] for the finite element modelling of the Anaconda's proximal 
ring.  The method removed the need for multi-turn bundle modelling by using a 
single turn of equivalent stiffness.  
Within this study, this approach was reassessed after limitations were identified by 
Mr David Bow, Knowledge Exchange Partner to this project. The limitations 
surrounded the linear theory on which this approach was based and the conflicting 
nonlinearity of Nitinol. A reassessment was also further justified as this approach 
was originally validated using experimental results from un-sutured rings. This 
followed from assumptions made that the ring sutures and graft fabric did not 
affect bundle stiffness.  
For this assessment sutured rings as used in the in the vascular testing programme 
(table 3.1) were commissioned through Vascutek. Once obtained, each rings 
stiffness was characterised through pseudo compactions within a Tinius Olsen 
Tensile machine, as shown in figure 5.7. This experiment was then modelled within 
the Finite Element environment allowing force/displacement results to be 
compared (figure 5.8).  
Figure 5.7: Ring fitted into a uniaxial tensile machine being compacted into the saddle shape.  
Figure 5.8: Experimental setup and FE representation. Each ring was fitted to the rig using high 
tensile strength line which was modelled in FE simulations as near inelastic.  The proximal ring 
was modelled according to the standard model presented in section 5.1.1. 
The testing rig used was fitted with an environmental chamber set to     . Each 
ring, once fitted, was allowed to equilibrate for 20 minutes. Twenty training cycles 
at a rate of 3 mm/min were performed before characterisation took place. Three 
rings were characterised during the testing programme (R_21, R_25 and R_34) all of 
which were made in an identical manner to the rings stipulated in table 3.1. Trends 
were consistent and as such comparisons between two of these devices, R_34 Lutz 
1.3 and R_25 Lutz 1.3. 
For comparison with experimental results, FE results using the Equivalent-I method 
were produced alongside a FE bundle model approximation. Bundle approximation 
results were produced by multiplying force results obtained from simulating the 
compaction of a single wire turn by the number of turns within a ring bundle. These 
results could be used to fully define the appropriateness of the Equivalent-I 
approach and gauge the merits of full bundle modelling.    
Figures 5.9 and 5.10 present the comparisons. What is clear from these graphs is 
that the Equivalent-I approach diverges from experimental results with increasing 
levels of compaction.  This is consistent with the limitations noted within the 
method which conflicts with material and geometric stiffness nonlinearities induced 
through increased compaction. To clarify the impact this divergence will have on 
the accuracy of simulation, red markers are included into figures 5.9 and 5.10 which 
indicate the operating range of rings (10 - 20% oversize). These markers were 
produced through considering, FE produced, ring displacement-compaction graphs 
as presented in figures 5.11 and 5.12, which correlates the level of axial compaction 
(figure 5.8) against diameter decrease (oversize).        
Although significant divergence is shown in figure 5.9 and 5.10, it should be 
emphasised that these lines are based on the 10-20% deployment range. As the 
arterial vessel is compliant, the ring will deform the vessel, resulting in a lower 
oversize. This can be seen in experimental data shown in figures 3.18, 3.24 and 3.30 
where the true operating oversize for devices deployed within the vascular testing 
programme range from as low as 6% to a maximum of 14%. Deficiencies within the 
Equivalent-I approach remain significant however and should be accounted for in 
situations where operational oversize is significant (>16%).  
The comparison between experimental and bundle approximation results 
supports previous findings whereby the effects of material sutures have a negligible 
effect on ring stiffness. These conclusions could be drawn from the results which 
suggest that each turn adds an independent contribution to overall ring stiffness. 
Results as shown in figures 5.9 and 5.10 also further eludes to the benefits of full 
bundle modelling, indicating a close match to  experimental results. 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 
Displacement (mm) 
FE Equivalent-I Continuum Model FE Bundle Approximation (Continuum) 
FE Equivalent-I Beam Element Model FE Bundle Approximiation (Beam Element) 
R_34 Lutz 1.3 Experimental Results 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 
Head Displacement (mm) 
FE Equivalent-I Continuum Model FE Bundle Approximation (Continuum) 
FE Equivalent-I Beam Element Model FE Bundle Approximation (Beam Element) 
R_25 Lutz 1.3 Experimental Results 
Figure 5.9:  Comparison between experimental results obtained for R_34 Lutz 1.3 and FE 
approximations. Continuum bundle modelling was found to provide the closest comparison to 
experimental results. The equivalent I approach was shown to diverge under increasing levels of 
strain. 
Figure 5.10:  Comparison between experimental results obtained for R_25 Lutz 1.3 and FE 
approximations. Similar trends were noticed to that obtained for R_34. 
Device Deployment Range 
Device Deployment Range 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 
Displacement (mm) 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
Displacement (mm) 
Figure 5.11: Relationship between axial displacement and the decrease in diameter for the R_34 
Lutz 1.3 device. Red lines indicate the diameters which are associated with the 10 - 20% oversize 
operation range (Approximately 10 to 13.96 mm compaction displacements). 
Figure 5.12: FE determined relationship between axial displacement and the decrease in 
diameter for the R_25 Lutz 1.3 device. Red lines indicate the diameters which are associated 
with the 10 - 20% oversize operation range (Approximately 6.7 to 9.04 mm compaction 
displacements). 
10% Oversize 
20% Oversize 
10% Oversize 
20% Oversize 
5.5 Material model validation  
In section 4.4.2.2 of this thesis, Holzapfel material parameters were derived for the 
three abdominal specimens characterised. These parameters were derived through 
marcos developed within Microsoft Excel. This section demonstrates that when 
incorporated into a FE software suite, these parameters are able to replicate the 
uniaxial experimental data collected during the vascular testing program.  
For this validation exercise uniaxial specimens were modelled within Abaqus 6.11. 
FE models incorporating non-linear C3D20 elements, were fully fixed at the base 
and subject to a displacement boundary condition as shown in figure 5.13. Each 
specimen modelled was assigned the derived material parameters before being 
subjected to a uniaxial stretch. Through this, the resulting stress-strain results 
response could be compared against experimental data. 
Figure 5.14, 5.15 and 5.16 displays results from this study. As can be seen in these 
figures, the predicted materials response compared well against experimental data. 
The biggest error was noted within Specimen 2's intimal response which was 
attributed to the highly anisotropic nature of this layer's axial and circumferential 
orientations.  
Furthermore, little is published on the ability of the Holzapfels constitutive model 
to fit different types of tissue response. In this study, it was noted that the model 
had limited ability to fit two data sets, which were initially isotropic, but which then 
experienced increasing anisotropy with increasing strain (for example, the intima 
response of specimen two as shown in figure 5.15). Although not perceived to be of 
major concern to this study, this could become a source of significant error when 
dealing with patient specific data sets.         
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
Strain (%, Engineering) 
Intima Axial Intima Circumferential 
Media Axial Media Circumferential 
Adventitia Axial Adventitia Circumferential 
AxialAdeventiaHolz HolzCircumFit 
Figure 5.13: Arterial specimen (left) and representative FE model (right).  
Figure 5.14: Fitting results for specimen 1. Coloured lines represent experimental data whilst 
black segmented lines represent relevant FE Results. Good agreement was achieved, with the 
largest divergence noted within the specimens intimal response.  
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
Strain (%, Engineering) 
Intima Axial Intima Circumferential 
Media Axial Media Circumferential 
Adventitia Axial Adventitia Circumferential 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 
Strain (%, Engineering) 
Intima Axial Intima Circumferential 
Media Axial Media Circumferential 
Adventitia Axial Adventitia Circumferential 
Figure 5.15: Fitting results for specimen 2. Coloured lines represent experimental data whilst 
black segmented lines represent relevant FE Results. Strongly anisotropic results, especially the 
Intima and Adventitia, resulted in less well fitting FE curves.  
Figure 5.16: Fitting results for specimen 3. Coloured lines represent experimental data whilst 
black segmented lines represent relevant FE Results. As can be seen from the graph, the 
constitutive model used was able to replicate the anisotropic nature of the specimens tested.  FE 
divergence from experimental results was noted for the adventitia circumferential results at 
large levels of strain (above 54%).  
5.5.1 Pressure-diameter comparisons 
For further arterial model validation the parameters derived in section 4.4.2 were 
assessed according to their ability to replicate biaxial deformations. For this 
purpose, the three specimens characterised within the vascular testing programme 
were modelled within Abaqus 6.11 using the FE framework created and data 
collected. The FE modelling methodology was identical to the Standard Model 
presented in section 5.1, with only relevant material parameters and geometry 
changes introduced per simulation. Each specimen was modelled using the average 
diameter as calculated during characterisation at 15% axial stretch. Once modelled, 
each tubular model was subjected to a 0-160 mmHg pressure range. 
Pressure/deformation results were then added to local unpressurised readings for 
comparison with FE results.  
Due to its young age, specimen 1s intima was thin in nature. In addition to this, its 
thickness varied dramatically across the section obtained, with localised regions  
being too thin to be reliably measured with a vernier caliper, as can be observed in 
figure 3.13. As a result, although samples could be obtained for uniaxial 
characterisation, overall, as an arterial layer, it was judged to provide an 
inconsistent and generally insignificant mechanical contribution to the vessel. As a 
result of this, the layer was omitted from arterial wall modelling activities. Not to 
deviate from the Standard model, the vessel was still modelled using three layers, 
using two to represent the media. Figure 5.17 displays the comparison between FE 
and experimental results for specimen 1s pressurisation. Considering the 
considerable difficulties involved with arterial modelling, figure 5.17 is seen as a 
reasonable replication of experimental results.  
Due to the more substantial nature of specimen 2's intimal layer, it was included 
into the vessel model. Once the tubular specimen was modelled, pressure/diameter 
FE results were compared against experimental results. Figure 5.18 displays the 
results of this comparison, revealing a fairly accurate fit. In general, the results seem 
to converge at higher pressures, with only pressure/diameter data at the inflection 
point not agreeing. As with specimen 1, FE simulations generally under predicted 
the elasticity of arterial tissue.  
14.00 
14.50 
15.00 
15.50 
16.00 
16.50 
17.00 
17.50 
18.00 
18.50 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 
Pressure (mmHg) 
Below Renals Above Bifrucation FE Approximation 
Figure 5.19 displays comparison results obtained for specimen 3. FE results fitted 
well against pressure/diameter data obtained just below the Inferior Mesenteric 
Artery (IMA). A less reasonable fit was obtained for the more elastic response noted 
below the renal arteries. As both locations had approximately the same initial 
unpressured diameter, local mechanical variability was thought to have influenced 
these findings.  
With reference to section 2.3.6, it has noted that arteries are subject to complex in 
situ residual stresses. These are generally thought to exist in order to homogenise 
physiological pressures, although their influence on vascular mechanics is yet to be 
fully understood and quantified. Due to the ambiguity which exists around these in 
situ stresses, and the substantial added computational difficulties these would 
introduce into a FEA, they were omitted from the integrated modelling framework 
design created in chapter 4. Figures 5.17 through to 5.19 however display a 
constant under prediction of vascular compliance by the Finite Element approach. 
This is thought to be a consequence of this omission of in situ stresses, and alluding 
to their significance.  
Figure 5.17:  Finite Element replication of Specimen 1's pressure/diameter data. As the 
unpressurised diameter for both the "Below Renals" and "Above Bifurcation" regions were 
14.25 mm, only one FE approximation for both data sets is provided. 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 
Pressure (mmHg) 
Below Renals Below IMA FE Approximation 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 
Pressure (mmHg) 
Below Renals Above Bifrucation 
FE Approximation Below Renals FE Approximation Above Bifrucation 
Figure 5.18:  Finite Element replication of Specimen 2's pressure/diameter data. For this 
simulation the average diameter of specimen 2 was used to model the vessel in FE. Subsequent 
pressure/diameter results were added to local "Below Renal" and "Above Bifurcation" 
diameters to produce results presented in the graft.  
Figure 5.19: Finite Element replication of Specimen 3's pressure/diameter data. For this 
simulation the average diameter of specimen 2 was used to model the vessel in FE. Results 
obtained for the simulation is shown in the graft.  
5.5.2 Device- artery profile comparisons 
To further support validation studies, device deployment simulations were 
modelled within FE (as per the standard model presented in section 5.1). FE 
deployment simulations were then compared against data collated during the 
vascular testing programme. Through this study, this framework's ability to 
replicate complex device/artery interactions could be assessed.  
For comparison, deformation profiles obtained during device deployment 
experiments were compared against Finite Element predictions. During this study, 
focus was placed on the peak deformations imparted by the device upon contact. 
Focus was placed on these locations as these deformations most directly relates to 
the deformation state of the proximal ring.  Within the comparisons presented, two 
characteristic internal pressure of 0 mmHg and 120 mmHg are shown for discussion. 
The largest discrepancy between FE predicted and experimental data is also 
highlighted.  
Figure 5.20 displays the comparison between FE predictions and experimental 
results for specimen 1. As can be seen from the image, finite element predictions 
followed similar patterns measured during deployment simulations. A maximum 
discrepancy of 26.84% was measured between FE and experimental results.  
Figure 5.21 displays the results obtained for a comparison between specimen 2's 
experimental results and FE simulations. As for specimen 1, a general under 
prediction of deformations was noted, with a maximum discrepancy of 32.23% 
being measured. With reference to figure 3.23, it should be noted that these results 
would be influenced by the considerable sections of calcification noted within 
specimens. Broadly speaking, FE was however able to capture deformation trends 
as obtained through experiment.  
Figure 5.22 displays results obtained for the comparison between FE and 
experimental results for Specimen 3. In general good results were achieved with 
peak-to-peak errors of less than 5% being measured. In addition, FE still generally 
under predicted deformations with a maximum divergence of 13.02% measured. 
Complex interactions were also captured through FE, where peak-to-peak 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 
Longitudinal Position (mm) 
Specimen 1 Ring 21 Lutz 1.3 at 0 mmHg FE Approximation 
Specimen 1 Ring 21 Lutz 1.3 at 120 mmHg FE approximation 
deformations imparted by the device were less pronounced at higher pressures. To 
the authors knowledge, these idiosyncrasies associated with the proximal rings 
interactions with the vascular have not yet been documented. With these 
interactions captured within FE, reassurance is given that experimental results were 
indeed a function of mechanical interactions rather than errors induced by the in 
vitro study. Further, with interactions captured in FE, an excellent platform for 
further investigation is presented.   
Figure 5.20:  Comparison between deployment profiles produced in section 3.4 against FE 
predictions.  
R_21 Lutz 1.3 at 120 mmHg peak-to-peak 
(Location of deployed ring) 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 
Longitudinal Position (mm) 
Ring 25 Lutz 1.3 at 120 mmHg FE Approximation 
Ring 25 Lutz 1.3 at 0 mmHg FE Approximation 
30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
Longitudinal Position (mm) 
Ring 25 Lutz 1.3 120 mmHg FE Approximation 
Ring 25 Lutz 1.3 at 0 mmHg FE Approximation 
Figure 5.21: Comparison between deployment profiles produced in section 3.4 against FE 
predictions. 
Figure 5.22: Comparison between deployment profiles produced in section 3.4 against FE 
predictions. 
The difference is thought to exist as a function of the under prediction of vascular 
compliance, as shown in the biaxial comparison and the deficiencies noted with the 
Equivalent-I approach.  
R_25 Lutz 1.3 at 0 mmHg peak-to-peak 
(Location of deployed ring) 
R_25 Lutz 1.3 at 0 mmHg peak-to-peak 
(Location of deployed ring) 
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 
Ring Oversize 
Configuration 1 (Ring Diameter 21.5 mm, Wire Diameter 0.18 mm) 
Configuration 2 (Ring Diameter 34.0 mm, Wire Diameter 0.24 mm) 
5.6  Strain accuracy prediction 
In section 5.5.2, it was shown that FE simulations and experimental results were 
within 32.0% agreement. To relate this finding to the accuracy of FE strain 
predictions produced through the integrated modelling framework, figure 5.23 is 
presented which correlates the oversize of the proximal ring against the peak strain 
it experiences. For discussion, only enveloping design solutions of the Anaconda are 
presented within this graph. It is also acknowledged that the ring/lumen oversize 
ratio never exceeds 20%,  as per Vascutek clinical protocol. 
As the device is released into the lumen, contact is made with the arterial wall and 
deformation takes place. During this deployment, the ring/lumen oversize ratio 
decrease from 20% as the vessel deforms. Recognising that the ring can only deform 
the vessel down to 0.0% oversize, it is clear that the 20% to 0% oversize range 
provides an operating envelope for all devices once deployed.  Furthermore, as 
seen in figure 5.23, ring configuration 1, provides the highest strain to ring oversize 
relationship, the equation of which is shown below in equation 5.2 (3
 order 
polynomial of best fit). 
                                                                  (5.2) 
Figure 5.23: FE results depicting the relationship between oversize and maximum strain 
experienced by the proximal ring for two enveloping design solutions.  
Maximum strain experienced 
by any device once implanted 
Enveloping for all devices 
As the framework has been shown to under predict deformations by 32%, the 
largest possible error in strain prediction will occur when a ring experiences the 
largest possible change in deformation (20% to 0%, once implanted). In this case of 
ring configuration 1, the vessel would have experienced a diameter expansion of 
approximately 4.3 mm as shown in equation 5.3. 
(5.3) 
For this expansion, in the worst case, the framework will under predict 
deformations by 32%,  resulting in an under prediction of expansion by 1.376 mm. 
This would result in a final equilibrium position of not 0% oversize, but 6.4% 
oversize conditions as demonstrated in equation 5.4. 
                                                                   (5.4) 
Using equation 5.2, the FE predicted strain at 6.4% oversize can be estimated as 
shown in equation 5.5.  
                                                                    (5.5) 
This value of 1.13% strain, can then be compared against the maximum strain the 
ring should have experienced, if allowed to expand into its planar state, as 
calculated in equation 5.6. 
                                    (5.6)  
Based on a 32% underproduction of deformation, results from equation 5.5 and 5.6, 
indicate that a maximum strain discrepancy approximately 0.36% can be expected. 
If the framework was used to calculate the strains at both systolic and diastolic 
pressures, allowances for a  error of twice this value, 0.72% should be made. 
These results are very reasonable considering the conservative approach of the 
calculation.  
5.7 Chapter summary  
This chapter addressed questions regarding the accuracy of the framework created 
in chapter 4. Results presented herein should be reflected against the complex 
nature of the materials involved, limitations in the constitutive models available and 
the complexities associated with the experimental studies conducted. 
Within section 5.2, analytical methods were used to demonstrate that the method 
developed to incorporate proximal ring pre-strains were fit for purpose. Further 
validation activities surrounding the proximal ring highlighted limitations regarding 
the Equivalent-I approach adopted from a previous study [24]. These limitations 
were contrasted against alternative methods of bundle modelling, providing 
support for future work recommendations made in chapter 7 of this thesis.  
In general, it was shown that material parameters derived in chapter 4 could 
replicate experimental stress/strain results. However, when incorporated into the 
framework, a trend of under predicting biaxial pressure/inflation experimental has 
been shown. This is thought to be a function of the omission of in situ stresses, a 
consequence of modelling the artery within a zero strain state. As the inclusion of 
these residual stresses falls outside of the time limits associated with this project it 
is hoped that future development of this framework could investigate the 
implementation of these. Further complicating the comparison between biaxial FE 
and experimental data was the uniformity of the FE models created in contrast to 
the feature intense true nature of biological tissue.   
In spite of the considerable challenges faced within this project, an agreement of 
within 32% between Finite Element and experimental displacement results has 
been shown within this chapter. Moreover, with the focus on reducing 
computational expense within chapter 3, it has been shown that such an agreement 
can be reached with a computational tool which could feasibility be used within the 
industry. When accessing strain prediction accuracies, it was shown that a 
discrepancy of up to 0.36% can be expected under extreme conditions. Clearly, such 
a discrepancy in strain prediction is significant. As a result, caution should be 
applied when interpreting FE results under conditions of large oversize.   
Although further progress within constitutive theory and FE modelling is clearly still 
needed, the ambitious nature of FE modelling attempted herein should be kept in 
mind. In addition to this, it was demonstrated that complex device/arterial 
interactions could be captured within Finite Element Analysis, clearly demonstrating 
the worth of the integrated modelling framework developed.  
With regard to the overall objectives of this study, a thorough assessment of the 
accuracies associated with current technologies within proposed context has been 
completed. This assessment was required in order to further encourage the 
industrial adoption of FE technologies and modelling techniques. 
6 Towards a design tool: further studies 
This chapter presents studies conducted to conclude the current thesis. Some of 
these studies are presented to provide an improved understanding of the 
integrated modelling framework's constituents, whilst others provide guidance on 
further work recommendations.  
Within section 6.1 a study conducted into the Load Path Dependency (LPD) effects 
of Nitinol will be presented. The effects of this material property were first 
indirectly noted by McCummiskey [24] and ambiguity still exists regarding its 
implications for design. FE studies and experimental results will be presented prior 
to the Anaconda device design implications being clarified.    
In section 6.2, two FE modelling techniques are introduced. The first of these 
addresses the limitations noted within the Equivalent-I approach in chapter 5. The 
technique used a combined beam and continuum approach to replicate bundle 
stiffness. The second technique introduced is a modelling approach devised to more 
accurately capture Nitinol's asymmetric material complexities. Methods will be 
outlined and preliminary results discussed.  
The chapter will conclude by assessing the framework's suitability for use in product 
design. Within this section a generalised abdominal aorta material model will be 
presented. The method by which this generalised model was developed is discussed 
and its limitations clarified. Results from these studies shed light on the applicability 
of the framework in the proposed context, thereby fulfilling the final objective this 
study set out to achieve.  
10.00 
12.00 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
Normalised Deflection % 
Normalised Simulation Results 
6.1 Nitinol's load path dependency effects 
Previous work by McCummiskey [24] suggest that the magnitude of the maximum 
strain experienced by the wire bundles during deformation, as calculated by FE, can 
be presented in a non-dimensionalised form (equation 6.1 to 6.3). In this way, the 
results from different bundle diameters, wire diameters and elastic modulus can be 
represented through a single curve.  
When this curve was first produced, as shown in figure 6.1 [24], data points were 
subject to an unexpected degree of scatter. For the current project, possible load 
path dependency effects were suggested as a key contributor to the anomalies 
noted.  
Figure 6.1: Proximal ring normalised strain and deflection relationship. 
Figure 6.1 depicts the non-dimensional relationship between the level of 
compaction and the maximum strain experienced by the proximal ring. Since its 
development in 2008 it has been incorporated into Vascutek's design methodology 
to simplify fatigue life calculations. 
Line of best fit 
Each data point in figure 6.2 represents a single simulation in which a ring was 
compacted and released into a rigid vessel. During the development of data points, 
the level of compaction and vessel size were kept identical while the ring sizes were 
varied according to dimensions used for Anaconda devices.   
For each simulation the process of normalisation followed a number of steps. First, 
the normalised strain was calculated using equation 6.1 
                                                 (6.1) 
where      is the maximum strain experienced by the proximal ring and    is the 
strain within a planar un-compacted ring as expressed in equation 6.2. 
                                                                 (6.2) 
Within equation 6.2        is the diameter of the wire and     is the diameter of 
the planar ring. The normalised deflection was calculated using equation 6.3, where 
    is the "diameter" of the deformed ring. 
                                                              (6.3) 
At the time of the graph's development, the scatter in data points around the curve 
of best fit was attributed to the varying ratio of the ring size to compaction level. 
For this to be true, a relationship had to exist between the "load history" of the ring 
and its final stress/strain state. Such a relationship has not been addressed in the 
literature to any extent. Furthermore, due to a lack of understanding of Nitinol's 
load path dependency, ambiguity exists concerning the implications that this effect 
might have for the design of endovascular devices.   
To investigate the potential LPD effects in the context of this research project, a 
preliminary study was initiated. For this, the framework was used to repeat three 
simulations conducted to create figure 6.2. For this three rings, R_28, R_32 and 
R_34, were modelled using the Equivalent-I approach and subjected to a 
deployment simulation. Deployment simulations were repeated several times, 
10.00 
12.00 
0.00 5.00 10.00 15.00 20.00 25.00 30.00 35.00 40.00 45.00 
Normalised Deflection 
Normalised Simulation Results R_28 Repeated R_32 Repeated R_34 Repeated 
Increasing levels of compaction, from 
24 mm to 9 mm     
varying the level of compaction incrementally between 9 and 24 mm. The standard 
model as introduced in section 5.1 was used for this study, substituting the 
Holzapfel material artery model for a rigid vessel representation.  
Figure 6.2 depicts the result of this exercise overlaid onto the original graph.  
Figure 6.2: Proximal ring normalised strain and deflection relationship. 
From figure 6.2, it is clear that a relationship of increased maximum strain within 
increasing levels of compaction exists. With this relationship confirmed, each of the 
original data points (Normalised Simulation results, figure 6.2) represents one of a 
scatter which can be achieved by varying the level of compaction.   
It is important to note that the effects evident in figure 6.2 were not due to 
permanent deformation. Within the conducted simulations, none of the rings 
underwent plasticity as deformations remained within the boundaries of super-
elasticity. The effect noticed in figure 6.2 was due to an internal mechanism of 
Nitinol elasticity as captured within the Auricchio constitutive model.  
With Nitinol LPD effects captured within Auricchio constitutive model, further 
investigations were warranted to clarify its potential effect on ring behaviour. LPD 
effects as referred to within the current context can also be clarified as follows:  
"The tendency for Nitinol's state variables, operating within the realm of 
super-elasticity, to be load path dependant when subjected to a cyclic 
loading regime"  
Further investigations focussed on the following questions:  
 Can LPD effects be isolated and studied under a simple bending regime?  
 Can LPD effects be captured experimentally and how would the results be 
correlated to FE studies? 
 What is the impact of LPD effects on design for the Anaconda device? 
Before any studies were conducted, a thorough literature review was completed. 
Key outcomes of this review are published in section 1.3 of this thesis. Evident from 
the literature review was a lack of consideration for LPD effects.  As a by-product 
that extends from the more fundamental hysteresis and super-elastic mechanisms, 
this behaviour trait seemed unaddressed by leading researchers working within the 
field of Nitinol characterisation.  
6.1.1 Simplified load path dependency FEA study 
To capture load path dependency effects, a cantilever beam was modelled within 
the FE code ANSYS 12.1 and subjected to the following load regime: Initially the 
beam was deflected at its free end to a displaced position (D) (figure 6.3). From this 
position the beam was further displaced by varying magnitude (D), and then 
allowed to return to the initial displacement (D). The object of the study was to 
establish a relationship between the cycle amplitude (D) and the final stress and 
strain state of the beam. 
Figure 6.3:  Beam model used to study LPD effects within a simplified case study. 
400 mm 
60 mm 
40 mm 
Point on the upper surface of the 
beam analysed during studies  
Fixed end (constrained along two edges) 
Results discussed in this thesis are those obtained when tracking the stress-strain 
behaviour of a single node at the base of the beam. The node selected was on the 
upper surface of the beam, offset from the elements subjected to boundary 
conditions (as illustrated in figure 6.3).  
Figure 6.4 shows the computational results achieved after cycling with a residual 
deflection (D) of 30 mm. As seen in figure 6.4, with increased amplitude, there was 
an increase in final strain value (Logarithmic) and an overall reduction in value of 
Von Mises stress. A pattern was noted where an increase in amplitude (D) resulted 
in a convergence towards a stable final stress-strain state. It was also noted, 
however, that prior to complete convergence, the element tracked would enter the 
second marternsitic elastic modulus, which incurred plasticity, and as such remains 
outside the operation range of most medical devices.   
By tracking this node through a simple loading regime, load history effects can 
clearly be seen and defined. Each of the six loading cases presented in figure 6.4 
were subject to identical final boundary conditions, yet a variation of up to 33% in 
stress values were observed. This illustrates the significant variation in results that 
can be achieved dependant simply on past loading events.   
Results shown here emphasise the importance of modelling the entire loading 
regime. This applies directly to the current context, where the entire compaction 
regime must be simulated in order to establish the ring's stress/strain states once 
deployed. Future iterations of the integrated modelling framework may even wish 
to take into account additional loading events associated with the delivery method. 
A clear line of further inquiry is also established as the long term cyclic behaviour of 
LPD effects are still poorly understood.    
0.000 0.005 0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.030 0.035 
Total logarithmic strain  
37.5 to 30 42.5 to 30 45 to 30 47.5 to 30 50.0 to 30 52.5 to 30 
Figure 6.4: Stress-strain measurements were taken as the maximum Von Mises stress and total mechanical strain at the root location of the beam (outer fibre).  
Simulation Path (D to D) (mm) 
Increasing D 
6.1.2 Load history within Nitinol specimen's 
With the effects of Nitinol's load history as captured in FE clarified, further work 
was aimed at capturing the effects within an experimental study. For this three 
proximal rings were commissioned and manufactured to an identical standard to 
that used  for the Anaconda device  (R_21, R_25 and R_34, as stipulated in table 
3.1). The objective of the study was to determine whether LPD effects could be 
noted within the proximal ring through simple uniaxial, compaction like cycles. 
For this study, each ring device was in turn tethered to an uniaxial tensile machine 
as seen in figure 6.5. An identical test setup was used for stiffness characterisation 
in chapter 5, section 3.4. Once equilibrated to     , and 20 training cycles had 
been completed, the ring was subjected to a testing regime similar to that used for 
the cantilever beam in section 6.1.1. A residual displacement was established (D) 
from which the ring was displaced to distance D and allowed to return to D. A 
range of these cycles were completed throughout which the crosshead 
displacement of actuators were recorded, alongside the force (N) required to 
compact the ring into the saddle shape.    
Figure 6.5: R_34 Proximal ring attached with flyline to a uniaxial tensile rig.  
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 
Deflection Amplitude D (mm) R_25 Lutz 0.5 
The force exerted by the ring (N), once returned to residual displacement (D) from 
displacement (D), is shown in figure 6.6 and 6.7. Load path dependency within 
specimens was clearly observed. A trend was displayed in which an increase in 
deflection amplitude D led to a decrease in the final load exerted by the 
compacted ring (N). This indicated a decrease in final energy potential with 
increasing levels of strain amplitude D.  
Results shown here support the findings made in section 6.1.1 and potentially 
highlights further design considerations for the Anaconda device. As ring stiffness 
can be correlated to the sealing properties of the Anaconda device, LPD effects can 
not only have an effect on the fatigue life of the device but also sealing properties 
of the device once deployed. Further investigations will, however, be required to 
confirm these findings, and a relationship between compaction stiffness and radial 
force also needs to be clearly defined.  
Figure 6.8 shows the results obtained when experimental work was repeated within 
the Finite Element environment, using the Equivalent-I approach (section 5.1). 
Results indicate that FE captured load history effects in a similar manner to that 
obtained through experimental methods, with plateauing of results occurring at  
higher D values.  
Figure 6.6: R_25 Lutz 0.5 results, where residual deflection D was 11.00 mm. 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 
Delfection Amplitude D (mm) R_34 Lutz 1.3 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 
Deflection Amplitude D (mm) R_34 Lutz 1.3 
Figure 6.7: R_34 Lutz 1.3 results, where residual deflection D was 14.25 mm. 
Figure 6.8: R_34 Lutz 1.3 simulation results. Compared to figure 6.5 and 6.6, results indicate 
that FEA were capable of replicating LPD effects measured  during experimental work. A slight 
under-prediction of force results by FEA was also noticeable (further investigated in section 
6.2).   
6.2 Multi-turn model 
In section 4.2.3, issues were noted regarding the Equivalent-I approach adopted 
from a previous study. It was shown that a violation of the assumptions on which 
the approach is based caused a divergence from experimental results at high levels 
of strain. To address these issues, a new method was proposed in the present study 
to simplify the modelling of Nitinol wire bundles. The method was based on results 
displayed in figures 5.9 and 5.10 where it is shown that the beam element approach 
can capture the stiffness properties of individual wires within a bundle.  
The method proposed begins with the modelling of a single continuum wire turn. 
On the centreline of this continuum turn, a number of beam element wires are 
modelled so that the total number of wires is equal to that of the proximal ring 
simulated. To remove the need for complex wire interaction modelling, individual 
wire turns are pinned together at several locations. As incorporated into the 
framework, these locations were at centreline positions,  where quarter symmetry 
boundaries exists, as well as midway between (as illustrated in figure 6.9). To 
further simplify the method and reduce computational cost, pins were introduced 
only once individual wires were compacted as shown in figure 6.10.  
Using this method detailed state variables values can be read from the single 
continuum representation whilst bundle stiffness properties were obtained through 
computationally less expensive beam elements. For convenience, and to adhere to 
naming conventions used later in this thesis, the approach was referred to as the Bi-
Element approach. To illustrate the effectiveness of the Bi-Element approach figure 
6.11 is presented here, which shows that, the Bi-Element approach was used to 
extend a study first presented in section 5.4. The graph shows the reaction force 
required to compact the proximal ring, as estimated by two opposing FE 
approaches, compared against experimental results. As can clearly be seen, a 
marked improvement in accuracy was achieved through using the Bi-Element 
model. This improvement is achieved through a relatively small increase in 
computational costs and a decrease in numerical stability.  
Figure 6.9: Bi-Element wire bundle modelling method. This image displays the initial geometric 
layout of brick (green) and beam elements (red). As seen, all wire turns share a common 
centreline with no contact simulated. Wire turns are pinned at quarter symmetric boundaries, 
as shown.  
Figure 6.10: Bundle model formation through three steps. First multiple rings are formed from 
the straight drawn condition (1). Once drawn, individual rings are compacted into the saddle 
shape (2).  An additional step is then introduced, during which the individual turns are joined to 
form the combined bundle model (3).  
Pin Locations 
0 5 10 15 20 
R34 Lutz 0.9 Bi-Element Method Equivalent I Approach 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 
Displacement (mm) 
Figure 6.11: The Bi-Element approach compared against experimental data and Equivalent-I 
approach.   
As shown in figure 6.11, the Bi-Element method closely approximated experimental 
results. A divergence is noted at higher compactions which are attributed to the 
dominance of the beam element approach within the method. As this divergence is 
mainly out of the operation window of the proximal ring once deployed the 
approach still holds merit.  
6.3 The Bi-Material model approach 
Nitinol compression/tension asymmetry is a well-documented phenomenon, often 
linked to the increase in transformation energy required to cause the onset of 
super-elastic mechanisms when under compression. This asymmetry poses 
significant challenges for FE constitutive modelling. 
In its current form, the Abaqus 6.11 built-in Nitinol constitutive model provides 
users with the option of modelling the asymmetry by specifying a single parameter 
around which the built in algorithms automatically estimate the material's 
behaviour during compression. This approach provides little customisation and can 
lead to a significantly comprised material definition. Alongside these difficulties is 
the additional numerical burden that an asymmetric material model brings, which 
can lead to excessively long solution times and severe convergence instabilities. 
These instabilities can make the use of an asymmetric model unfeasible, especially 
if other forms of nonlinearity or complex contact conditions are involved. In these 
situations, users may be forced to return to a symmetric model, which can further 
lead to a compromised model.    
In this section, an approach is proposed for addressing these issues until such times 
where improved constitutive models can be presented. The approach is based 
around the Auricchio Nitinol constitutive model and is subject to two conditions: (1) 
no single element enters the transformation state in both compression and tension; 
(2) the first elastic modulus for compression and tension are identical.  
The above approach consists of introducing an additional symmetric Nitinol 
material model that is optimised for capturing the compressive behaviour of the 
specimen as illustrated in figure 6.12. The material definition is then assigned to 
relevant elements, resulting in a single part consisting of two symmetrical material 
models. Through this, as shown in figure 6.12, an improved compressive stress-
strain curve fit over a purely asymmetrical model can be achieved. This, in theory, 
can dramatically improve the accuracy of Nitinol FE representation, overcoming 
current constitutive model limitations. The more asymmetric and irregular the 
compressive response is, the more significant the potential advantages are of the 
method proposed in this thesis.  
For ease of reference, throughout this section, the method will be referred to as the 
Bi-Material Method. To assess the merits of the approach outlined, a thorough FE 
study was completed. To convey the major findings of this investigation, two case 
studies are presented here. The first of these is that of a Nitinol beam in bending 
whilst the second is the direct application to the proximal ring.  
-2000 
-1800 
-1600 
-1400 
-1200 
-1000 
-0.1 -0.08 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 
Strain 
Tensile Test 
Compressive Test 
Assymetric Model 
Compresive FE Model 
Figure 6.12: Using the Bi-Material modelling technique, elements that are judged to enter the compressive regime within an analysis are assigned an alternative 
Nitinol model. This alternative model's tensile behaviour is manipulated in such a way that when it is set to be symmetric, it is optimised to capture compressive 
behaviour. The potential benefit of this approach can be clearly distinguished from the graph.  
-1000 
-0.05 -0.04 -0.03 -0.02 -0.01 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 
Strain E22 
Asymmetric Model Symmetric Compression Model Symmetric Tension Model 
6.3.1 Bi-Material model development 
In total, three Nitinol material models were used for this study as shown in table 
6.1. The two symmetrical models were manually developed and optimised for 
capturing the tensile and compressive behaviour of the asymmetric model, as 
shown in figure 6.13. 
Table 6.1: Material models used during Bi-Material model development. 
Parameter Units Asymmetric 
Model 
Symmetrical 
 (Tension) 
 Symmetrical 
(compression) 
   MPa 65800.0 65800.0 65800.0 
   - 0.435 0.435 0.435 
   MPa 65800.0 65800.0 65800.0 
   - 0.435 0.435 .435 
   - 0.0538 0.0538 .04017 
 5.74 5.74 5.74 
    MPa 637 637 853 
    MPa 657 657 879 
C 0 0 0.0 
 6.99 6.99 6.99 
    MPa 327 327 437 
    MPa 307 307 412 
     MPa 853 0.0 0.0 
    - 0.0538 0.0538 0.04017 
   - 0.0 0.0 0.0   
Figure 6.13: The two symmetric models developed for this study, overlaid on top of the 
asymmetric model conventionally used to represent Nitinol.  
6.3.1.1 Case study one: Beam under bending   
The first case study presented here to illustrate the feasibility of the approach 
utilised the cantilever beam introduced in section 6.1.1. The cantilever beam was 
subjected to a loading regime which included a vertical displacement (D) of 20 mm, 
a further displacement of 40 mm (D), before being returned to the residual 
displacement (D). The analysis was repeated 3 times, each time using an alternative 
material as follows:  
1. Through the use of the complete asymmetric model as defined in table 6.1.  
2. Through the use of the Bi-Material approach.    
3. Using a single symmetric model as defined in table 6.1. 
As the two symmetric models used in the Bi-Material approach was developed 
around the asymmetric model, the results from these two simulation methods can 
be directly compared against one other. Differences in results can provide insight 
into the suitability of the Bi-Material approach. For further comparison, an analysis 
was completed using a single symmetric model based on the tensile definition.      
Table 6.2 displays the Von Mises results obtained from this study. Results displayed 
within the table are with reference to results obtained using the asymmetric model. 
Differences were calculated on a node-to-node basis and are displayed in the table 
in percentage form.  
Table 6.2: A node-for-node comparison of Von Mises stresses against those obtained when using 
an asymmetric model. Results are given per analysis step.  
Symmetric Model     
Step-20  (D) Step-40  (D) Step-20 (D) 
Maximum 
difference 
Average  
difference 
difference 
Average  
difference 
difference 
Average  
difference 
0.0% 0.00% 61% 4.11% 75.07% 4.13% 
Bi-Material Method     
Step-20 (D) Step-40  (D) Step-20 (D) 
difference 
Average  
difference 
difference 
Average  
difference 
difference 
Average  
difference 
0.0% 0.00% 11% 0.000297% 13% -0.012% 
Case study one results discussion  
The aim of this study was to assess the use of modelling methods to address Nitinol 
asymmetry, thereby relinquishing the need for capturing asymmetry within the 
material definition. Such an approach can lead to significant improvements the 
robustness of computational models and reduce computational expense.  
The Bi-Material approach is based on an understanding of the Auricchio Nitinol 
constitutive model incorporated into Abaqus 6.11.2. The constitutive model 
simplifies a variety of material characteristics, one of which is an identical first 
elastic modulus for both compression and tension. With this simplification, the 
response is always symmetric up to the point where the super-elastic mechanisms 
are encountered. This implies that a symmetrical material definition can capture the 
behaviour at any point in a model in a similar manner to an asymmetrical model, as 
long as said symmetrical model is optimised for capturing the super-elastic state 
that the associated element will enter. This assumption breaks down if any one 
element enters both the super-elastic compression and tension states.  
Table 6.2 shows that all three methods captured the initial Step-20 in an identical 
manner. This was simply due to the material remaining within the elastic regime 
during this load step. During Step-40 and Step-20, large differences were primarily 
observed within elements containing additional boundary conditions. A divergence 
of results was also noted at material definition boundaries, signalling the potential 
onset of numerical instabilities.  
It should be noted that the Bi-Material method will never yield identical results to 
an asymmetric model when capturing effects under compression in the 
transformed state. The reason for this lies with the host of automatically derived 
parameters over which the Abaqus.cae user has no direct control (such as the 
volumetric expansion and contraction coefficients associated with changing 
microstructures). As the user has no control over these parameters, they cannot be 
optimised during material model development. During case study 1, this in part lead 
to the differences noted.  
In spite of some notable differences in results obtained between the Bi-Material 
and asymmetric approaches, averaged errors, as noted in table 6.2 remained small. 
This, combined with an analysis of reaction forces during simulations indicated that 
both approaches captured beam stiffness in a similar manner.  
6.3.1.2 Case study two: application to the Anaconda device  
Case study two considered the application of the Bi-Material model approach to the 
Anaconda's proximal ring, which was identified as meeting the requirements for Bi-
Material implementation.  
For this study, the ring-forming and compaction stages were simulated using 
identical representations to case study one, those being: (1) a complete asymmetric 
model; (2) the Bi-Material approach and; (3) a single symmetric representation 
(symmetric tension as defined in table 6.1). 
By comparing the results obtained through these methods an assessment could be 
made of the suitability of the approach in the current context. A comparison 
between von Mises stresses, expressed as a percentage difference to that obtained 
through the asymmetric approach is shown in table 6.3.  
Table 6.3: A node-to-node comparison of alternative methods against Von Mises stresses 
obtained when using an asymmetric model. Although accentuated, patterns remained broadly 
the same as those noticed for case study 1. 
Symmetric Model 
Ring forming phase 
Compaction phase 
Maximum 
difference 
Average 
difference 
Maximum 
difference 
Average 
difference 
0% 0% 
368% 3.87% 
Bi-Material Method   
Ring forming phase 
Compaction phase 
Maximum 
difference 
Average 
difference 
Maximum 
difference 
Average 
difference 
0% 0% 
96% 6.44% 
Case study 2 results discussion  
From table 6.3 shows that results from phase 1 remained identical between the 
various forms of representation. This finding was in line with expectations as the 
ring remained within the linear elastic regime during this phase. 
In subsequent phases, results were seen to diverge. This divergence increased 
through the compaction phase and resulted in significant differences found for peak 
levels of strain. Although these differences were dramatic at first glance, they were 
consistent with trends noted in case study 1 (table 6.2) and less severe with an 
understanding of proximal ring kinematics.   
The ring forming kinematics referred to here is the level of twist that the ring 
experienced during compaction. Analysis indicated that this level of twist was 
different for each of the simulations conducted within this study. This resulted in a 
slightly altered stress distribution across the ring, producing inflated node-for-node 
discrepancies as recorded in table 6.3.  
Major contributors to the degree of twist the wire experienced is coefficients such 
the volumetric expansion/contraction of austenite and martensite. As these 
coefficients are not user inputs, and automatically calculated by predefined 
constitutive relations, they cannot be optimised within the symmetric material 
definitions. It was hence, in part, the relative difference in expansion/contraction 
coefficients between simulations conducted within this study that affected ring 
kinematics and as a result, altered stress distributions.   
Analysis of the results obtained for the Highest Recorded Values in table 6.3 
indicated that these differences were largely related to the formation of 
singularities. These singularities formed at dissimilar material boundary edges, and 
were amplified at regions where boundary conditions existed.   
It is clear from the results presented in this thesis that the Bi-Material approach 
cannot be implemented without significant case specific analysis. The benefits of 
additional control over Nitinol's compressive definition must be considered against 
stability complications and the development of irregular stress concentrations. 
6.4 Formation of a generalised arterial model parameter set 
For future development of a product design tool a single generalised material 
definition has can be proposed. This is not a trivial task, however, considering the 
variability of arterial tissue and the limited number of specimens tested in this 
study.  From the assessment presented in chapter 3, figures 3.33 through to 3.38, it 
was shown that the characterisation data produced fell within the scope of a more 
general published study [72]. With this the correlation between studies identified, 
an opportunity was presented to collate data. As a result, statistically significant 
data sets were formed from which generalised material parameters could be 
drawn.  
Through the collating exercise, data for seven intimas, eleven medias and twelve 
adventitias obtained from [72] were combined with the present study. Expressed in 
Holzapfel FE parameter form, data for some these specimens are shown in table 
6.4. When this study was completed, parameter sets published by Weisbecker 
containing zero k2 values were omitted from the collating exercise as it was found 
that the use of these particular parameter resulted in the analyses being aborted, 
with an error message of "incorrect parameter definition", in Abaqus 6.10 cae (only 
relevant to 5 intima and 1 media parameter sets).  
Median parameters as put forward in table 6.5 can be seen as representing 
generalised parameters that can be used to model the abdominal aorta. Figure 6.14 
presents these medians in graphical form alongside limit curves produced by 
collated parameters.  Graphs "a" through to "c", all of whom have been scaled to 
the same strain values, can be compared against one another to illustrate the 
progression of compliance characteristics through the vessel wall.  
Table 6.4: Collated data sets for the intima, media and adventitia 
Intima 
 k1 k2   
VIII 0.068 25.91 67.45 37.5 0.23 
IX 0.105 30.9 16.24 47.6 0.28 
XVII 0.076 5.14 103.31 38.5 0.25 
Specimen 1 0.0065 0.389 27.25 47.1 0.14 
Specimen 2 0.025 35.42 10.625 49.1 0.228 
Specimen 3 0.014 0.728 20.94 47.6 0.17 
Median 0.0465 15.525 24.095 47.35 0.229 
Media 
 k1 k2   
I 0.036 0.52 19.09 42.6 0.05 
V 0.033 1.42 29.26 43.9 0.1 
IX 0.028 0.92 10.33 35 0.28 
XII 0.021 0.62 35.3 39.1 0.28 
XIII 0.019 0.15 6.52 36.5 0.28 
XIV 0.023 1.09 18.91 35.5 0.22 
XVI 0.028 0.81 0.08 48.7 0.08 
XVII 0.017 0.19 12.42 44.2 0.12 
Specimen 1 0.091 0.145 5.58 44.2 0.12 
Specimen 2 0.01 0.22 13.42 45.8 0.135 
Specimen 3 0.0095 0.219 8.77 42.9 0.135 
Median 0.021 0.52 12.42 42.9 0.135 
Adventita  
 k1 k2   
I 0.008 1.06 1.09 47 0.1 
V 0.005 0.38 5.55 36.3 0.12 
VIII 0.01 0.49 3.35 36.1 0.27 
IX 0.016 0.44 3.41 45.9 0.12 
XII 0.008 1.06 1.09 47 0.1 
XIII 0.01 0.3 6.31 51.2 0.3 
XIV 0.003 0.2 1.88 36.1 0.02 
XVI 0.005 0.51 0.43 51.7 0.02 
XVII 0.011 0.12 4.73 40.6 0.12 
Specimen 1 0.003 0.0465 4.68 51.7 0.1425 
Specimen 2 0.012 0.035 28.41 52.9 0.08 
Specimen 3 0.001 0.11 7.4 59.6 0.21 
Median 0.009 0.34 4.045 47 0.12 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 
Strain (%) 
Holzapfel IX Median Specimen 1 
Specimen 2 Median Specimen 1 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 
Strain (%) 
Media XIV Median Media XIII 
Holzapfel XVI Median Specimen 1 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 
Strain (%) 
Holzapfel V Median Specimen 3 
Holzapfel V2 Median Holzapfel I 
 Figure 6.14: Median plots against limit parameters for the intima (a), media (b) and adventitia 
(c). Within these graphs, blue is used to represent circumferential direction, while red denotes 
axial direction. 
To assess the merits associated of using a generalised data set, biaxial compliance 
studies presented in chapter 5, section 5.4.2, were revisited. Within section 5.4.2 FE 
pressure-diameter simulations for specimen 1, 2 and 3 are presented. The section 
assesses the ability of data specific material models to replicate data obtained 
during experimentation. Here, these simulations were repeated, substituting the 
particular data sets for the generalised one developed here. By noting the 
difference in deformations obtained between particular and generalised forms of 
representation, insight into the relative results can be presented here.  
Table 6.6 shows the results of the present study. As can be seen, the generalised 
parameter set tended to marginally under-predict deformations obtained when 
using particular representations.  This result is consistent with figure 6.14, which 
indicate that Median parameters tended to be less compliant than those obtained 
for specimens tested within the vascular tissue characterisation program.  
Table 6.5:  Generalised parameter set for the human abdominal aorta 
 k1 k2   
Intima 0.0465 15.525 24.095 47.35 0.229 
Media 0.021 0.52 12.42 42.9 0.135 
Adventita 0.009 0.34 4.045 47 0.12 
Table 6.6:  Generalised parameter set for the human abdominal aorta 
 Pressure 
(mmHg) 
Vessel external 
diameter as measured 
in experimental 
programme (mm) 
FE estimation 
using particular 
model (mm) 
FE estimation 
using generalised 
model (mm) 
Specimen 1 
80 16.98 16.47 16.32 
120 17.95 17.11 17.03 
Specimen 2 
80 20.07 19.75 19.61 
120 21.21 20.62 20.55 
Specimen 3 
80 20.88 19.10 19.02 
120 22.30 20.41 20.21 
6.5 Chapter summary 
A comprehensive literature review revealed that most studies involving Nitinol 
neglected taking Load Path Dependency effects into account. Through the use of a 
simple FE based case study, the substantial influence of LPD effects was clarified 
and the potential consequences for endovascular device design outlined. For the 
case study considered, it was shown that LPD effects could potentially influence the 
radial force applied by the proximal ring. A correlation between LPD effects as seen 
within FEA and as captured within experiments was also established. Due to the 
significance of the study into LPD effects, findings were presented at the 
international conference on Shape Memory and Super-elastic Technologies 2011 
(SMST 2011).  
In this chapter, a solution to the computational issues surrounding multi-turn 
bundle modelling was presented. The technique developed was seen as novel and 
having potential applications outside the scope of the current context. A further 
modelling technique referred to as the Bi-Material approach was presented within 
this chapter. The approach addressed deficiencies within the current constitutive 
models available for Nitinol. Both the merits and limitations of the approach were 
clearly outlined using two case studies. Case studies showed that although 
additional control over the compressive behaviour of Nitinol could be achieved, the 
development of singularities and stability issues made the applicability of the 
modelling technique case specific.  
Finally, a generalised parameter set for the abdominal Aorta was presented. The set 
was developed by collating data from published studies, producing the largest 
database available for such parameters. Once developed, the generalised 
parameter set was incorporated into the integrated modelling framework. Through 
repeating biaxial compliance simulations conducted with particular artery 
parameters,  comments on the applicability of such a generalised set could be made 
for the first time. This is seen as a considerable step forward for the incorporation 
of the FE method into the field of endovascular device design, thus, meeting the 
final objective the current work set to achieve.  
7 Thesis summary and conclusions  
This chapter provides a summary of the research conducted. It clarifies the extent 
to which thesis objectives have been met and draws conclusions from the work 
presented. Statements of novelty and recommendations for further developments 
are also provided.  
7.1 Thesis summary  
This research project had the principle objective of investigating the use of 
emerging FE technologies for the design of endovascular devices. For this purpose, a 
thorough literature review was conducted, the primary outcomes of which have 
been presented. The review was comprehensive in nature, addressing relevant 
topics under the headings of Super-Elastic Nitinol and arterial tissue.  
Through the literature review, the wealth of data available concerning Nitinols 
mechanical properties was revealed. Gaps in the knowledge relevant to the work 
herein were shown to be largely limited to constitutive modelling, the mechanical 
response of thin wires in compression and the influence of load path dependency 
on the alloys stress-strain response. 
While it was shown that ample relevant data is available where Nitinol is concerned, 
the distinct lack of data available for human arterial tissue was highlighted. For the 
objectives studied in the present paper, this lack of data was seen as a considerable 
shortcoming as  it meant that ambiguity still exists regarding basic questions such as 
the variability of mechanical properties in the presence of arterial features. The lack 
of layer-specific data also means that generalised material parameters have yet to 
be proposed. Generalised material parameters are fundamental for the 
development of FE design tools.  
A review of published studies that have investigated FE device-artery interactions 
was also presented. Although several relevant studies were found during this 
review, none investigated the interactions between super-elastic Nitinol and a 
three-layered Holzapfel arterial model. An investigation into these interactions will 
set a benchmark for current FE capabilities within the field of endovascular device 
design.  
The knowledge gaps identified through the literature review were consolidated 
under the research objectives of the present thesis. With clear deficiencies noted in 
the data available where human arterial tissue is concerned, a vascular tissue 
testing programme was initiated. Within this programme, three human abdominal 
aortas were characterised. The experimental protocol used during the programme 
was established through extensive testing with porcine specimens, whilst the 
experimental pressure-diameter rig employed was developed especially for this 
purpose.  
The vascular programme was the first comprehensive, layer-specific 
characterisation programme aimed at specifically meeting the data requirements 
for human abdominal aorta material model development and subsequent FE model 
validation. To this extent, the work presented can be viewed as a valuable 
contribution to the academic field. As the scope of the programme was broad, a 
vast array of data was made available that had previously only been accessible 
through a collection of disjointed studies.   
With the required material modelling data produced, the focus of this thesis turned 
to the development of a FE-based device-artery interaction simulation. The 
approach adopted was to create a modular framework of material, geometrics, load 
case and interaction properties. During the development of the framework, a 
number of challenges were encountered, the solutions for which were presented. 
Some novel solutions included the Bi-Material approach, which addressed 
constitutive modelling limitations and the Bi-Element approach, which addressed 
wire bundle modelling challenges. Neither of these modelling approaches has 
previously been proposed within the literature and was viewed as having large scale 
application outside the boundaries of this research project.  
With the framework developed, focus was placed on issues of validation and 
accuracy. Validation activities first verified the appropriateness of boundary 
conditions sets used for the proximal ring. A concerted effort was also made to 
demonstrate agreement between beam and continuum element forms of ring 
representation. Once boundary conditions were verified as being appropriate, focus 
turned to the material models that had been developed. Device-artery simulations 
were compared against data, which had specifically been collated during the 
vascular testing programme for this purpose. Through this step-wise validation 
procedure, a critical review of the design framework was provided that clearly 
identified all its merits and limitations.  
The final device-artery simulations created during this research project were the 
most comprehensive of their kind. With built-in versatility, robustness and an 
understanding of the accuracies involved, the framework was also deemed viable 
for industrial implementation. This outcome of the research satisfied one of the 
central academic questions that the research project set out to address, i.e., 
demonstrating the appropriateness of current technologies within the proposed 
industrial setting. Although capabilities have been demonstrated, it is 
acknowledged that due to a number of complexities involved in the FE modelling of 
endovascular devices, overall accuracies may be doubtful. 
7.2 Thesis conclusions  
The thesis provided an assessment of current FE technologies and the role it can 
play within the design of endovascular devices. During this assessment, the merits 
and limitations of two relevant constitutive models (the Auricchio Nitinol and 
Holzapfel arterial models) were extensively explored.  
The Auricchio model was found to be adequate for the current application. Due to 
the number of relevant academic studies present in the literature, a comprehensive 
understanding of the accuracies associated with the model was available. Within 
the present work, the Auricchio material model could be integrated into a number 
of novel FE proximal ring studies without any significant difficulties. The most 
urgent development required in the FE representation of Nitinol is further control 
over the compressive response of material models.  
The Holzapfel constitutive model has been subjected to a much lower level of peer 
review. The peer reviews that are available within the literature tend to focus on 
uniformity in plane deformations. To this extent, this thesis clearly demonstrated 
the Holzapfel models ability to replicate uniaxial tensile stress-strain experimental 
data. Primarily, however, the validation procedures presented in this thesis were 
extended to assess the models ability for capturing complex out-of-plane 
deformations. It was shown that the model is able to capture pressure-diameter 
results to reasonable levels of accuracy (within 32% of deformations). Results 
indicated that, in addition to the constitutive relations, the FE in situ modelling of 
the arterial vessel poses considerable challenges that are yet to be met (i.e., 
capturing residual in situ residual stresses).  
When the two material models (Holzapfel and Auricchio) were combined within the 
same model to perform deployment simulations, typical accuracies within 40% of 
experimental deformation results were obtained. When relating these 
deformations to the accuracies of strain predictions, it was demonstrated that 
caution should be applied when interpreting results from FE models where the 
proximal ring is compacted past 15% oversize. It was shown that under these 
conditions, due to a power-law relationship, strain results can be considered 
unreliable. Although it is recognised that within this figure there is considerable 
room for improvement, the difficulty of the attempted simulation should be 
emphasised. Moreover, usefulness is provided through an understanding of 
limitations and merits, as opposed to accuracies per se.  
The two material models discussed were also successfully integrated into a novel 
framework of Python scripts. These scripts were able to construct a number of FE 
studies within Abaqus 6.11, demonstrating the potential value of the framework as 
a tool that can be used in the design of endovascular devices. These studies were 
remarkably computationally efficient, considering that simulations involved contact 
between two highly non-linear material models under large levels of deformations. 
It is felt that the interactions between the hyper-elastic Holzapfel and super-elastic 
Auricchio models currently represent a benchmark for endovascular device FE 
modelling. It is therefore the conclusion of this thesis that the highly non-linear 
material models required for endovascular device modelling can be integrated into 
a FE study, while at the same time remaining efficient and robust. This conclusion is 
significant, as these are the basic requirements if the models are to be used within 
parameter optimisation studies within the industry.  
Towards the objectives of this thesis 
 Regarding the principle objective of the thesis: the use of FE technologies 
within the design process of endovascular devices was successfully 
investigated. This was achieved through the development of a framework of 
Python scripts that can be used to investigate device-artery interactions. 
This framework can be used to determine the stress/strain states of an 
endovascular device in situ and through this be used as a design tool.  
 An objective of the research project was to build upon previous studies. To 
this extent, several FE modelling methodologies were adopted from 
previous research projects (e.g., Equivalent-I). The creation of a generalised 
parameter set also relied on the notion of building upon previous 
experimental programmes, where data produced in the present study were 
combined with data available in the literature.  
 During the Python script development, focus was placed on aspects of 
computational expense and robustness. This objective was clearly met with 
reference to section 4.4.3, where a significant reduction in computational 
time was achieved between like-for-like simulations conducted in the 
present study when compared to those conducted in previous research 
projects.  
 Focus was placed on quantifying the levels of accuracy associated with 
device-artery simulations. Towards this objective, a chapter within this 
thesis (chapter 6) was dedicated to validation activities. Through a step-wise 
approach of validation, the boundary conditions used and material models 
developed were independently checked prior to device-deployment 
simulations and were compared against experimental data.  
 A generalised material model for the human abdominal aorta was proposed, 
thus meeting a central objective of this project.  
 It is felt that the limitations/merits of current constitutive models available 
for Nitinol (Auricchio [62]) and arteries (Holzapfel [90]) were successfully 
demonstrated during this research project, thereby meeting another 
research objective. The limitations associated with Nitinols asymmetric 
representation within the Auricchio constitutive model were not only 
highlighted, but also addressed through the Bi-Material approach. The 
ability of the Holzapfel constitutive model to predict complex, out of plane 
deformations was for the first time investigated in the literature. The 
stability of both models was also explored under complex contact conditions 
and large scale deformation.  
 Further novel FE modelling methodologies for the representation of wire 
bundles were proposed.  
With these objectives met, it is recognised that the integrated modelling framework 
proposed in the present thesis will require further development if it is to be 
successfully integrated into the design process. Until such a time, the framework 
stands as an excellent research tool which can be used for a variety of studies. An 
example of such a study can be to quantify the radial force exerted by endovascular 
devices once deployed. The consistency of this radial force along the circumference 
of the proximal ring during the cardiac cycle could also be established, and a 
correlation with potential leaking locations explored. This data will be useful in 
addressing issues such as type 1 endoleaks, a major cause of device failures in situ. 
Further studies could establish the relationship between the radial force exerted by 
the ring and anchoring characteristics. Such data could lead to improved designs 
and reduce the risk of stent migration. Towards the  objective of a product 
development tool integrated into the design process, further research 
recommendations are provided in the following section.  
7.3 Further research recommendations  
Arterial testing: further research recommendations 
 During the vascular testing programme, best practice of arterial 
pressurisation without an internal balloon conduit was assumed. Although 
this worked well during protocol development with porcine specimens, the 
method led to significant leaking issues during pressure-diameter testing 
with human specimens. As the literature remains ambiguous about best 
practice protocols, more should be done to define set procedures that 
future studies can follow.  
 One recommendation is to add to the existing data pools through further 
experimental testing. With additional data, female/male variations, as well 
as age bands can be separated. Narrowing the specimen envelopes will lead 
to less scatter in results and more accurate simulations.   
 Residual stresses were not included into the FE arterial model. Part of the 
reason for this was the general unreliability of current residual stress data. 
Further studies aimed at developing experimental protocols for the 
characterisation of in situ residual stresses are required.   
 Further research should be conducted to better define a reliable method by 
which arterial layers can be separated. During this research project, layers 
were frequently damaged, leaving little left for characterisation.  
 Although it was shown that regional characterisation can be regarded as 
adequate for material model development, future studies are urged to 
perform site specific characterisation. This is in part to remove the 
ambiguities associated with regional characterisation and in part to limit 
variables within data sets. It is also argued that, as more data becomes 
available, the narrowing of specimen envelopes (specifically age and gender) 
will reduce the scatter of data sets, during which time the site specific 
variation may become more apparent.  
Nitinol: further research recommendations 
 Relevant to the current work, further research is required to determine the 
behaviour of thin Nitinol wires (<0.18 mm) under compression.   
 There is an urgent need for improving constitutive relations in order to fully 
capture Nitinols asymmetric nature in the context of tension and 
compression. The current focus on the tensile aspect limits adequate 
characterisation where bending deformation is dominant.  
 This project determined that load history effects are adequately captured 
within the current Auricchio constitutive relations over a single cycle. It is 
recommended that the work presented in this thesis be extended to 
determine the influence of load history effects over a larger number of 
cycles (>100). If it is shown that load history effects influence the materials 
stress-strain response over a large number of cycles, the consequences for 
fatigue performance should clearly be clarified.  
FE modelling of device-artery interactions: further research recommendations 
 With the deficiencies noted concerning the Equivalent-I approach, it is 
hoped that the stability of the Bi-Element and Bi-Material solutions can be 
improved to the point where they can be used in conjunction with the 
Holzapfel material definition. It is believed that such a development will 
significantly improve the accuracy of the simulations presented in this thesis.  
 Little has been done to clearly define the merits of different forms of arterial 
representation. A dedicated study that considers solely the different FE 
representations of arteries is therefore required. Idealised forms of 
modelling, such as shell elements, should also be explored.   
 The framework developed in this thesis is an excellent tool for future 
studies. A study that needs to be conducted is an in depth investigation into 
the maximum errors that can possibly be achieved when using the 
generalised material model proposed in chapter 3. These errors will be 
obtained when comparing results obtained from the general model to those 
achieved using enveloping material parameters.  
 To improve the usability of the framework, it should be incorporated into 
Abaqus cae as a plug-in application. In this way, users can directly interact 
with the framework without the need for manipulating Python scripts. This 
step will also promote the adoption of the framework by the industry.  
 Finally, the incorporation of in situ residual stresses into an arterial model is 
seen as a major further research recommendation. Following on from 
recommendations made regarding the experimental data required to 
support such an endeavour, this recommendation is viewed as supporting 
large-scale independent study. The incorporation of residual stresses into 
the arterial model should initially be followed by a parameter study. This will 
clarify the significance of these stresses on the mechanical characteristics of 
the artery.   
7.4 Final words 
The research presented in this thesis was driven by academic interest and guided by 
industrial needs. It is believed that the project's outcome managed to bridge the 
gap between a variety of previously unconnected academic projects and final 
industrial applications.  
Although it has been shown that a viable FE-based endovascular product design tool 
can be created using current technologies, the complexities in doing so must not be 
underestimated. At the centre of this project were two vastly different, highly non-
linear materials that interacted with each other under complex loading conditions. 
Throughout the course of the project, experimentation with soft tissue was needed, 
which required considerable practical laboratory skills and knowledge. A broad 
range of expertise was therefore required, which took a considerable length of time 
to develop. It is, however, believed that the value of the work has been 
demonstrated and it is hoped that future studies will build upon the work 
presented.  
Finally, it is hoped that the work presented within this thesis will positively impact 
the future design of endovascular devices. 
8 References 
[1] Endovascular stentgrafts for the treatment of abdominal aortic aneurysms, 
Natl. Inst. Heal. Care Excell., vol. 167, no. September, 2009. 
[2] M. S. Makaroun, G. W. Barone, D. Bandyk, G. L. Moneta, and A. Frank, The 
Aneurysm Detection and Management Study Screening Program, Am. Med. 
Assoc., vol. 160, no. 1, pp. 14251430, 2000. 
[3] P. Cuypers, J. Buth, P. L. Harris, E. Gevers, and R. Lahey, Reprinted article 
Realistic expectations for patients with stent-graft treatment of abdominal 
aortic aneurysms. Results of a European multicentre registry., Eur. J. Vasc. 
Endovasc. Surg., vol. 42 Suppl 1, pp. S6371, Sep. 2011. 
[4] A. R. Zankl, H. Schumacher, U. Krumsdorf, H. a Katus, L. Jahn, and C. P. 
Tiefenbacher, Pathology, natural history and treatment of abdominal aortic 
aneurysms., Clin. Res. Cardiol., vol. 96, no. 3, pp. 14051, Mar. 2007. 
[5] C. Dubost, M. Allary, and N. Oeconomos, Resection of an aneurysm of the 
abdominal aorta: reestablishment of the continuity by a preserved human 
arterial graft, with result after five months., AMA. Arch. Surg., vol. 64, no. 3, 
pp. 4058, Mar. 1952. 
[6] R. M. Greenhalgh, L. C. Brown, G. P. S. Kwong, J. T. Powell, and S. G. 
Thompson, Comparison of endovascular aneurysm repair with open repair in 
patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm (EVAR trial 1), 30-day operative 
mortality results: randomised controlled trial., Lancet, vol. 364, no. 9437, pp. 
8438, 2004. 
[7] J. C. Parodi, J. C. Palmaz, and H. D. Barone, Transfemoral intraluminal graft 
implantation for abdominal aortic aneurysms., Ann. Vasc. Surg., vol. 5, no. 6, 
pp. 4919, Nov. 1991. 
[8] M. Manish, Risks and Benefits of Endovascular Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm 
Repair (EVAR), a video released by the Society for Vascular Surgery, 
Society for Vascular Surgery, US, 2010. 
[9] M. R. Greenhalgh, Endovascular aneurysm repair versus open repair in 
patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm (EVAR trial 1): randomised 
controlled trial., Lancet, vol. 365, no. 9478, pp. 217986, 2003. 
[10] G. Iannelli, M. Monaco, L. Di Tommaso, F. Piscione, P. Stassano, P. P. 
Mainenti, S. Laurino, and N. Spampinato, Endovascular vs. open surgery of 
abdominal aortic aneurysm in high-risk patients: a single center experience., 
Thorac. Cardiovasc. Surg., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 2914, Oct. 2005. 
[11] C. K. Zarins and C. a Taylor, Endovascular device design in the future: 
transformation from trial and error to computational design., J. Endovasc. 
Ther., vol. 16 Suppl 1, no. Suppl I, pp. I1221, Feb. 2009. 
[12] N. Saratzis, N. Melas, A. Saratzis, J. Lazarides, K. Ktenidis, S. Tsakiliotis, and 
D. Kiskinis, Anaconda aortic stent-graft: single-center experience of a new 
commercially available device for abdominal aortic aneurysms., J. Endovasc. 
Ther., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 3341, Feb. 2008. 
[13] M. L. Marin, L. H. Hollier, S. H. Ellozy, D. Spielvogel, H. Mitty, R. Griepp, 
R. a Lookstein, A. Carroccio, N. J. Morrissey, V. J. Teodorescu, T. S. Jacobs, 
M. E. Minor, C. M. Sheahan, K. Chae, J. Oak, and A. Cha, Endovascular 
stent graft repair of abdominal and thoracic aortic aneurysms: a ten-year 
experience with 817 patients., Ann. Surg., vol. 238, no. 4, pp. 58693; 
discussion 5935, Oct. 2003. 
[14] D. Perrin, N. Demanget, P. Badel, S. Avril, and L. Orgeas, Deployment of 
stent grafts in curved aneurysmal arteries: toward a predictive numerical tool, 
Int. j. numer. method. biomed. eng., 2015. 
[15] G. Mouktadiri, B. Bou-Sad, and H. Walter-Le-Berre, Aortic endovascular 
repair modeling using the finite element method, J. Biomed. Sci. Eng., vol. 6, 
no. September, pp. 917927, 2013. 
[16] D. Roy, C. Kauffmann, S. Delorme, S. Lerouge, G. Cloutier, and G. Soulez, 
A literature review of the numerical analysis of abdominal aortic aneurysms 
treated with endovascular stent grafts, Comput. Math. Methods Med., 2012. 
[17] F. Migliavacca, L. Petrini, V. Montanari, I. Quagliana, F. Auricchio, and G. 
Dubini, A predictive study of the mechanical behaviour of coronary stents by 
computer modelling., Med. Eng. Phys., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 138, Jan. 2005. 
[18] C. Lally, F. Dolan, and P. J. Prendergast, Cardiovascular stent design and 
vessel stresses: a finite element analysis., J. Biomech., vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 
157481, Aug. 2005. 
[19] S. N. D. Chua, B. J. Mac Donald, and M. S. J. Hashmi, Finite-element 
simulation of stent expansion, J. Mater. Process. Technol., vol. 120, no. 
September 2001, pp. 335340, 2002. 
[20] C. Rogers, D. Y. Tseng, J. C. Squire, and E. R. Edelman, Balloon-Artery 
Interactions During Stent Placement: A Finite Element Analysis Approach to 
Pressure, Compliance, and Stent Design as Contributors to Vascular Injury, 
Circ. Res., vol. 84, no. 4, pp. 378383, Mar. 1999. 
[21] F. D. Whitcher, Simulation of in vivo loading conditions Nitinol vascular 
stent structures, Comput. Struct., vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 10051011, 1997. 
[22] M. Brand, M. Ryvkin, S. Einav, I. Avrahami, J. Rosen, and M. Teodorescu, 
Numerical Models of an Artery with Different Stent Types, in XII 
Mediterranean Conference on Medical and Biological Engineering and 
Computing 2010, pp. 545548. 
[23] X. Gong and A. Pelton, Finite Element Analysis on Nitinol Medical 
Applications, in Proceedings of IMECE, 2002, vol. 53, pp. 75  80. 
[24] E. McCummiskey, The development of an analysis tool for the design of 
endovascular devices, PhD Thesis, Univ. Strat., pp. 1264, 2008. 
[25] M. I. Ther, A. Technol, D. Stoeckel, C. Bonsignore, and S. Duda, A Survey 
of Stent Designs, A Nitinol Devices Components Publ., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 137 
 147, 2002. 
[26] C. K. J. Jr, H. Vm, G. Jl, and E. Anderson, FDA Recommendations for 
Nitinol Stent and Endovascular Graft Fatigue Characterization and Fracture 
Reporting, Jounral ASTM Int., vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 17, 2013. 
[27] D. Stoeckel, Nitinol medical devices and implants, Minim. Invasive Ther. 
Allied Technol., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 8188, Jan. 2000. 
[28] S. Ansari, D. J. McConnell, G. J. Velat, M. F. Waters, E. I. Levy, B. L. Hoh, 
and J. Mocco, Intracranial stents for treatment of acute ischemic stroke: 
evolution and current status., World Neurosurg., vol. 76, no. 6 Suppl, pp. 
S2434, Dec. 2011. 
[29] Drug-eluting stents for the treatment of coronary artery disease Part review of 
NICE technology, Natl. Institure Heal. Clin. Excell. NICE Technol. apprasial 
Guid. 71, no. April, 2009. 
[30] M. Bumler, T. Stargardt, J. Schreygg, and R. Busse, Cost effectiveness of 
drug-eluting stents in acute myocardial infarction patients in Germany: results 
from administrative data using a propensity score-matching approach ., Appl. 
Health Econ. Health Policy, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 235  248, 2012. 
[31] S. B. White and S. W. Stavropoulos, Management of Endoleaks following 
Endovascular Aneurysm Repair., Semin. Intervent. Radiol., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 
338, Mar. 2009. 
[32] D. Stockel, Nitinol - A material with unusual properties, ndc Library, 1998. 
[33] M. B. Streiff, Review article Vena caval filters: a comprehensive review, 
Am. Soc. Hematol., vol. 95, no. 12, pp. 36693677, 2000. 
[34] T. Yoneyama and S. Miyazaki, Shape Memory Alloys for Biomedical 
Applications, in A volume in Woodhead Publishing Series in Biomaterials, 
San Jose, 2009. 
[35] A. Ooi, D. Franklin, and S. Ohri, Improved Technique of Nitinol Sternal Clip 
Application, Ann. Thorac. Surg., vol. 87, no. 6, pp. 1971  1972, 2009. 
[36] T. Duerig and A. Pelton, TiNi Shape Memory Alloys, Prop. Handb. Titan. 
Alloy., no. 1, pp. 1035  1049, 1994. 
[37] S. Daly, D. Rittel, K. Bhattacharya, and G. Ravichandran, Large Deformation 
of Nitinol Under Shear Dominant Loading, Exp. Mech., vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 
225233, Oct. 2008. 
[38] Stoeckel and Yu, Superelastic NiTi Wire, Wire J. Int., pp. 45 50, 1991. 
[39] L. Orgcas, Y. Liu, and D. Favier, Experimental Study of Mechanical 
Hysteresis of NiTi During Ferroelastic and Superelastic Deformation, J. 
Phys. III, vol. 7, pp. 477482, 1997. 
[40] S. Daly, G. Ravichandran, and K. Bhattacharya, Stress-induced martensitic 
phase transformation in thin sheets of Nitinol, Acta Mater., vol. 55, no. 10, 
pp. 35933600, Jun. 2007. 
[41] B. Reedlunn, C. B. Churchill, E. E. Nelson, J. A. Shaw, and S. H. Daly, 
Tension , Compression , and Bending of Superelastic Shape Memory Alloy 
Tubes, in ASME 2011 Conference on Smart Materials, Adaptive Structures 
and Intelligent Systems, 2011, pp. 249258. 
[42] P. ittner, M. Landa, P. Luk, and V. Novk, R-phase transformation 
phenomena in thermomechanically loaded NiTi polycrystals, Mech. Mater., 
vol. 38, no. 56, pp. 475492, May 2006. 
[43] L. Jordan, M. Chandrasekaran, M. Masse, and G. Bouquet, Study of the 
Phase Transformations in Ni-Ti Based Shape Memory Alloys, Le J. Phys. IV, 
vol. 05, no. C2, pp. C2489C2494, Feb. 1995. 
[44] J. Eaton-Evans, J. M. Dulieu-Barton, E. G. Little, and I. a Brown, 
Observations during mechanical testing of Nitinol, Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. 
Part C J. Mech. Eng. Sci., vol. 222, no. 2, pp. 97105, Feb. 2008. 
[45] A. R. Pelton, Nitinol Fatigue: A Review of Microstructures and 
Mechanisms, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., vol. 20, no. 45, pp. 613617, Feb. 
2011. 
[46] M. Wagner, T. Sawaguchi, G. Kaustrter, D. Hffken, and G. Eggeler, 
Structural fatigue of pseudoelastic NiTi shape memory wires, Mater. Sci. 
Eng. A, vol. 378, no. 12, pp. 105109, Jul. 2004. 
[47] E. Henderson, D. H. Nash, and W. M. Dempster, On the experimental testing 
of fine Nitinol wires for medical devices., J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater., 
vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 2618, Apr. 2011. 
[48] Abaqus/CAE Users Manual 6.11. . 
[49] H. Soul, A. Isalgue, A. Yawny, V. Torra, and F. C. Lovey, Pseudoelastic 
fatigue of NiTi wires: frequency and size effects on damping capacity, Smart 
Mater. Struct., vol. 19, no. 8, Aug. 2010. 
[50] A. Wick, X. Gong, J. Fino, J. Sheriff, and A. R. Pelton, Bending fatigue 
characteristics of Ntinol, Proc. SMST, pp. 361366, 2006. 
[51] J. L. McNichols, P. C. Brookes, and J. S. Cory, NiTi fatigue behavior, J. 
Appl. Phys., vol. 52, no. 12, 1981. 
[52] S. Miyazaki, K. Mizukoshi, T. Ueki, T. Sakuma, and Y. Liu, Fatigue life of 
Ti50 at.% Ni and Ti40Ni10Cu (at.%) shape memory alloy wires, Mater. 
Sci. Eng. A, vol. 273275, pp. 658663, Dec. 1999. 
[53] S. W. Robertson, a. Mehta, a. R. Pelton, and R. O. Ritchie, Evolution of 
crack-tip transformation zones in superelastic Nitinol subjected to in situ 
fatigue: A fracture mechanics and synchrotron X-ray microdiffraction 
analysis, Acta Mater., vol. 55, no. 18, pp. 61986207, Oct. 2007. 
[54] Y. Freed and L. Banks-sills, Crack growth resistance of shape memory alloys 
by means of a cohesive zone model, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, vol. 55, no. 10, 
pp. 21572180. 
[55] S. Robertson, J. Stankiewicz, X. Gong, and R. Ritchie, Cyclic Fatigue of 
Nitinol, Proc. Int. Conf. Shape Mem., pp. 7987, 2004. 
[56] T. W. Duerig, A. Pelton, A. R. Pelton, X. Gong, and T. Duerig, Fatigue 
Testing of Diamond Shaped Specimens, in Proceedings of SMST 2003, 
Monterey, CA, 2003, pp. 293302. 
[57] M. M. Patel, M. R. Mitchell, K. Jerina, and S. W. Dean, Characterizing 
Fatigue Response of Nickel-Titanium Alloys by Rotary Beam Testing, J. 
ASTM Int., vol. 4, no. 6, p. 100390, 2007. 
[58] F. Nematzadeh and S. K. Sadrnezhaad, Effects of material properties on 
mechanical performance of Nitinol stent designed for femoral artery: Finite 
element analysis, Sci. Iran., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 15641571, Dec. 2012. 
[59] C. Grabe and O. T. Bruhns, Path dependence and multiaxial behavior of a 
polycrystalline NiTi alloy within the pseudoelastic and pseudoplastic 
temperature regimes, Int. J. Plast., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 513545, Mar. 2009. 
[60] N. Rebelo, X. Gong, A. Hall, A. R. Pelton, T. W. Duerig, A. West, P. P. 
Parkway, F. Suite, N. Devices, and W. Drive, Finite Element Analysis on the 
Cyclic Properties of Superelastic Nitinol, 2004 Abaqus Users Conf., pp. 
601613. 
[61] C. L. Zollikofer, F. Antonucci, M. Pfyffer, F. Redha, E. Salomonowitz, G. 
Stuckmann, and I. Largiadr, Arterial stent placement with use of the 
Wallstent: midterm results of clinical experience., Radiology, vol. 179, no. 2, 
pp. 44956, May 1991. 
[62] F. Auricchio, R. L. Taylor, and J. Lubliner, Shape-memory alloys: 
macromodelling and numerical simulations of the superelastic behavior, 
Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng., vol. 146, no. 34, pp. 281312, Jul. 1997. 
[63] F. Auricchio, G. Scalet, and M. Urbano, A Numerical/Experimental Study of 
Nitinol Actuator Springs, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 2420
2428, Feb. 2014. 
[64] M. J. Thubrikar, M. Labrosse, F. Robicsek, J. Al-Soudi, and B. Fowler, 
Mechanical properties of abdominal aortic aneurysm wall., J. Med. Eng. 
Technol., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 13342, 2001. 
[65] D. H. Wang, M. Makaroun, M. W. Webster, and D. A. Vorp, Mechanical 
properties and microstructure of intraluminal thrombus from abdominal aortic 
aneurysm., J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 123, no. 6, pp. 5369, Dec. 2001. 
[66] S. R. H. Barrett, M. P. F. Sutcliffe, S. Howarth, Z.-Y. Li, and J. H. Gillard, 
Experimental measurement of the mechanical properties of carotid 
atherothrombotic plaque fibrous cap., J. Biomech., vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 1650
5, Aug. 2009. 
[67] G. A. Holzapfel, Determination of material models for arterial walls from 
uniaxial extension tests and histological structure., J. Theor. Biol., vol. 238, 
no. 2, pp. 290302, Jan. 2006. 
[68] J. Gosline, M. Lillie, E. Carrington, P. Guerette, C. Ortlepp, and K. Savage, 
Elastic proteins: biological roles and mechanical properties., Philos. Trans. 
R. Soc. Lond. B. Biol. Sci., vol. 357, no. 1418, pp. 12132, Feb. 2002. 
[69] B. Dobrin, Mechanical Properties of Arteries, Physiol. Rev., vol. 58, no. 2, 
pp. 397447, 1978. 
[70] M. P. E. Wenger, L. Bozec, M. a Horton, and P. Mesquida, Mechanical 
properties of collagen fibrils., Biophys. J., vol. 93, no. 4, pp. 125563, Aug. 
2007. 
[71] A. J. Schriefl, G. Zeindlinger, D. M. Pierce, P. Regitnig, and G. a Holzapfel, 
Determination of the layer-specific distributed collagen fibre orientations in 
human thoracic and abdominal aortas and common iliac arteries., J. R. Soc. 
Interface, vol. 9, no. 71, pp. 127586, Jun. 2012. 
[72] H. Weisbecker, D. M. Pierce, P. Regitnig, and G. a Holzapfel, Layer-specific 
damage experiments and modeling of human thoracic and abdominal aortas 
with non-atherosclerotic intimal thickening., J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. 
Mater., vol. 12, pp. 93106, Aug. 2012. 
[73] M. Labrosse, Structure and Mechanics of the Artery, Vasc. Mech. Pathol. 
(1st ed), Springer, 2007. 
[74] J. Kim and S. Baek, Circumferential variations of mechanical behavior of the 
porcine thoracic aorta during the inflation test., J. Biomech., vol. 44, no. 10, 
pp. 19417, Jul. 2011. 
[75] J. H. Black, Technique for repair of suprarenal and thoracoabdominal aortic 
aneurysms., J. Vasc. Surg., vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 93641, Oct. 2009. 
[76] M. R. Labrosse, C. J. Beller, T. Mesana, and J. P. Veinot, Mechanical 
behavior of human aortas: Experiments, material constants and 3-D finite 
element modeling including residual stress., J. Biomech., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 
9961004, 2009. 
[77] H. P. Wagner, Mechanical Characterisation, Modelling, and Examination of 
a Muscular Intracranial and Elastic ExtraCranial Artery with an Emphasis on 
Microstructure, Residual Stress and Smooth Muscle Cell Activation, PhD 
Thesis, Texas A&M University, 2011. 
[78] J. Kim, B. Peruski, and C. Hunley, Influence of surrounding tissues on 
biomechanics of aortic wall, Int. J. Exp. Comput. Biomech., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 
105117, 2013. 
[79] A. Bollinger, J. P. Barras, and F. Mahler, Measurement of foot artery blood 
pressure by micromanometry in normal subjects and in patients with arterial 
occlusive disease, Circulation, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 506512, Mar. 1976. 
[80] G. A. Holzapfel and R. W. Ogden, Modelling the layer-specific three-
dimensional residual stresses in arteries, with an application to the human 
aorta., J. R. Soc. Interface, vol. 7, no. 46, pp. 78799, May 2010. 
[81] G. Sommer, Mechanical Properties of Healthy and Diseased Human Arteries 
Monographic Series TU Graz, PhD Thesis, Graz University of Technology, 
2008. 
[82] G. a Holzapfel, G. Sommer, M. Auer, P. Regitnig, and R. W. Ogden, Layer-
specific 3D residual deformations of human aortas with non-atherosclerotic 
intimal thickening., Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 53045, Apr. 
2007. 
[83] F. He and X. Li, Residual strains in the arterial wall: A 3D finite element 
model, Commun. Numer. Methods Eng., vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 13251337, 
2008. 
[84] L. G. Futterman and L. Lemberg, The effects of aging on arteries., Am. J. 
Crit. Care, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 4725, Sep. 2003. 
[85] M. A. Hajdu, D. D. Heistad, J. E. Siems, and G. L. Baumbach, Effects of 
aging on mechanics and composition of cerebral arterioles in rats, Circ. Res., 
vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 17471754, Jun. 1990. 
[86] G. Sommer and G. Holzapfel, 3D constitutive modeling of the biaxial 
mechanical response of intact and layer-dissected human carotid arteries., J. 
Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 11628, Jan. 2012. 
[87] R. Wulandana and M. Robertson, An inelastic multi-mechanism constitutive 
equation for cerebral arterial tissue., Biomech. Model. Mechanobiol., vol. 4, 
no. 4, pp. 23548, Dec. 2005. 
[88] J. Ferruzzi, D. a Vorp, and J. D. Humphrey, On constitutive descriptors of the 
biaxial mechanical behaviour of human abdominal aorta and aneurysms., J. 
R. Soc. Interface, vol. 8, no. 56, pp. 43550, Mar. 2011. 
[89] T. C. Gasser, R. W. Ogden, and G. a Holzapfel, Hyperelastic modelling of 
arterial layers with distributed collagen fibre orientations., J. R. Soc. 
Interface, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 1535, Feb. 2006. 
[90] G. Holzapfel, T. . Gasser, and R. . Ogden, A new constitutive framework for 
arterial wall mechanics and a comparative study of material models, Jounral 
Elast., vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 1  48, 2000. 
[91] Bose ElectroForce 3200 Series III Test Instruments Users Manual. . 
[92] R. C. Looft-Wilson and C. V Gisolfi, Rat small mesenteric artery function 
after hindlimb suspension., J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 88, pp. 11991206, 2000. 
[93] C. A. J. Schulze-Bauer, C. Mrth, and G. a. Holzapfel, Passive Biaxial 
Mechanical Response of Aged Human Iliac Arteries, J. Biomech. Eng., vol. 
125, no. 3, pp. 012, 2003. 
[94] G. A. Holzapfel, G. Sommer, and P. Regitnig, Anisotropic Mechanical 
Properties of Tissue Components in Human Atherosclerotic Plaques, J. 
Biomech. Eng., vol. 126, no. 5, p. 657, 2004. 
[95] G. A. Holzapfel and R. W. Ogden, On planar biaxial tests for anisotropic 
nonlinearly elastic solids. A continuum mechanical framework, Math. Mech. 
Solids, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 474489, Mar. 2008. 
[96] M. A. Creager, T. F. Lscher, F. Cosentino, and J. a Beckman, Diabetes and 
vascular disease: pathophysiology, clinical consequences, and medical 
therapy: Part I., Circulation, vol. 108, no. 12, pp. 152732, Sep. 2003. 
[97] G. J. Langewouters, K. H. Wesseling, and W. J. Goedhard, The static elastic 
properties of 45 human thoracic and 20 abdominal aortas in vitro and the 
parameters of a new model., J. Biomech., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 42535, Jan. 
1984. 
[98] R. W. Ogden, Nonlinear Elasticity , Anisotropy , Material Stability and 
Residual stresses in Soft Tissue, Biomech. Soft Tissue Cardiovasc. Syst., vol. 
108, no. 441, pp. 65108, 1997. 
[99] D. Y. Gao and R. W. Ogden, Multiple solutions to non-convex variational 
problems with implications for phase transitions and numerical computation, 
Q. J. Mech. Appl. Math., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 497522, Jul. 2008. 
[100] G. Sommer, P. Regitnig, L. Kltringer, and G. a Holzapfel, Biaxial 
mechanical properties of intact and layer-dissected human carotid arteries at 
physiological and supraphysiological loadings., Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. 
Physiol., vol. 298, no. 3, pp. H898912, Mar. 2010. 
[101] H. Gavin, The Levenberg-Marquardt method for nonlinear least squares 
curve-fitting problems, Masters Dissertation, Duke University, Department 
of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 2011.  
Appendix 1 - Computer specifications 
During this research project all simulations were conducted on a work station with 
the following specifications 
Manufacturer : Dell 
Model  : Precision T3500 
Processor : Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU W350 @ 2.8GHz 
Installed Ram : 12.0 GB 
System Type : 64-Bit 
Appendix 2 - Rig fittings drawings 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
Strain (%) 
Intima Axial Sample 1, Run 1 Intima Axial Sample 1, Run 2 
Intima Axial Sample 1, Run 3 Intima Axial Sample 1, Run 4 
Intima Axial Sample 1, Run 5 
Appendix 3 - Arterial specimen data 
Within chapter 3, results obtained from uni-axial force stretch experiments were 
presented. As FE material modelling requirements dictate a single data set, per 
layer, per direction, only representative curves were presented within the chapter. 
Here, in appendix 3, all uni-axial data acquired during the programme are 
presented, and the choice of representative curves justified. Results are presented 
here per specimen, per layer, per direction, with the representative curves for that 
particular data set illustrated in black within each figure. In some cases, the same 
sample was subjected to altered displacement cycle regimes, with the term "run" in 
the figure legend used to indicate this.  
Specimen 1 
In total, eleven test samples were harvested from individual arterial layers, with 
stress-strain results shown below in figure Appendix 3.1 through to 3.6.  
Figure Appendix 3.1: Results obtained for the one sample harvested in the axial direction from 
the artery's intimal layer. The representative curve chosen was the one during which the sample 
experienced maximum extension and was in the most trained state.    
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 
Strain (%) 
Intima Circumferential Sample 1, Run 1 Intima Circumferential Sample 1, Run 2 
Intima Circumferential Sample 1, Run 3 Intima Circumferential Sample 1, Run 4 
Intima Circumferential Sample 1, Run 5 Intima Circumferential Sample 1, Run 6 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
Strain (%) 
Media Axial Sample 1, Run 1 Media Axial Sample 1, Run 2  
Media Axial Sample 2, Run 1  Media Axial Sample 2, Run 2 
Media Axial Sample 2, Run 3 Media Axial Sample 2, Run 4 
Figure Appendix 3.2: Results obtained for the one sample harvested in the circumferential 
direction from the artery's intimal layer. The representative curve chosen was the one during 
which the sample experienced maximum extension and was perceived to be in a trained state.  
Figure Appendix 3.3: Results obtained for the two samples harvested in the axial direction from 
the artery's medial layer. The representative curve chosen was the one during which the sample 
experienced maximum extension and was perceived to be in the trained state. 
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
Strain (%) 
Media Circumferential Sample 1, Run 1 Media Circumferential Sample 1, Run 2 
Media Circumferential Sample 1, Run 3 Media Circumferential Sample 2, Run 1 
Media Circumferential Sample 2, Run 2 Media Circumferential Sample 2, Run 3 
Media Circumferential Sample 3, Run 1 
0 10 20 30 40 50 
Strain (%) 
Adventita Axial Sample 1, Run 1 Adventita Axial Sample 1, Run 2 
Adventita Axial Sample 1, Run 3 Adventita Axial Sample 1, Run 4 
Adventita Axial Sample 2, Run 1 
Figure Appendix 3.4: Results obtained for the three samples harvested in the circumferential 
direction from the artery's medial layer. Results obtained from sample 3 were chosen to be 
representative as it was enveloped by both samples 1 and 2.   
Figure Appendix 3.5: Results obtained for the two samples harvested in the axial direction from 
the artery's adventitial layer. The representative curve chosen was the one during which the 
sample experienced maximum extension.  
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
Strain (%) 
Adventita Circumferential Sample 1, Run 1 
Adventita Circumferential Sample 2, Run 1 
Adventita Circumferential Sample 2, Run 2 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 
Strain (%) 
Intima Axial Sample 1, Run 1 Intima Axial Sample 2, Run 1 
Intima Axial Sample 2, Run 2 Intima Axial Sample 2, Run 3 
Intima Axial Sample 2, Run 4 
Figure Appendix 3.6: Results obtained for the two samples harvested in the circumferential 
direction from the artery's adventitial layer. The representative curve chosen was the one least 
subject to scatter.  
Specimen 2 
In total, twelve test samples were harvested from individual arterial layers, with 
stress-strain results shown below in figure Appendix 3.7 through to 3.12. 
Figure Appendix 3.7: Results obtained for the two samples harvested in the axial direction from 
the artery's intimal layer. The representative curve chosen was the one least subject to scatter.  
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
0 5 10 15 20 25 
Strain (%) 
Intima Circumferential Sample 1, Run 1 Intima Circumferential Sample 2, Run 1 
Intima Circumferential Sample 2, Run 2 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 
Strain (%) 
Media Axial Sample 1, Run 1 Media Axial Sample 1, Run 2 
Media Axial Sample 1, Run 3 Media Axial Sample 1, Run 4 
Media Axial Sample 2, Run 1 Media Axial Sample 2, Run 2 
Media Axial Sample 2, Run 3 Media Axial Sample 2, Run 4 
Figure Appendix 3.8: Results obtained for the two samples harvested in the circumferential 
direction from the artery's intimal layer. The representative curve chosen was the one least 
subject to scatter. 
Figure Appendix 3.9: Results obtained for the two samples harvested in the axial direction from 
the artery's medial layer. The representative curve chosen was the data set which was least 
subject to scatter, and represented the specimen in its most trained state. 
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 
Strain (%) 
Media Circumferential Sample 1, Run 1 Media Circumferential Sample 1, Run 2 
Media Circumferential Sample 1, Run 3 Media Circumferential Sample 1, Run 4 
Media Circumferential Sample 1, Run 5 Media Circumferential Sample 2, Run 1 
Media Circumferential Sample 2, Run 2 Media Circumferential Sample 2, Run 3 
Media Circumferential Sample 2, Run 4 Media Circumferential Sample 2, Run 5 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 
Strain (%) 
Adventitia Axial Sample 1, Run 1 Adventitia Axial Sample 1, Run 2 
Adventitia Axial Sample 1, Run 3 Adventitia Axial Sample 2, Run 1 
Adventitia Axial Sample 2, Run 2 Adventitia Axial Sample 2, Run 3 
Figure Appendix 3.10: Results obtained for the two samples harvested in the circumferential 
direction from the artery's medial layer. The representative curve chosen was the data set which 
was least subject to scatter, and represented the specimen in its most trained state. 
Figure Appendix 3.11: Results obtained for the two samples harvested in the axial direction from 
the artery's adventitial layer. The representative curve chosen was the data set which was least 
subject to scatter and experienced maximum extension.  
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 
Strain (%) 
Adventitia Circumferential Sample 1, Run 1 Adventitia Circumferential Sample 1, Run 2 
Adventitia Circumferential Sample 1, Run 3 Adventitia Circumferential Sample 1, Run 4 
Adventitia Circumferential Sample 1, Run 5 Adventitia Circumferential Sample 2, Run 1 
Adventitia Circumferential Sample 2, Run 2 Adventitia Circumferential Sample 2, Run 3 
Figure Appendix 3.12: Results obtained for the two samples harvested in the circumferential 
direction from the artery's adventitial layer. The representative curve chosen was the data set 
subject to least scatter and in the most trained state.   
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 
Strain (%) 
Intima Axial Sample 1, Run 1 Intima Axial Sample 1, Run 2 
Intima Axial Sample 2, Run 1 Intima Axial Sample 2, Run 2 
Intima Axial Sample 2, Run 3 
0 10 20 30 40 50 
Strain  (%) 
 Intima Circumferential Sample 1, Run 1 Intima Circumferential Sample 1, Run 2 
Intima Circumferential Sample 1, Run 3 Intima Circumferential Sample 1, Run 4 
Intima Circumferential Sample 1, Run 5 Intima Circumferential Sample 2, Run 1 
Specimen 3 
In total, eleven test samples were harvested from individual arterial layers, with 
stress-strain results shown below in figure Appendix 3.13 through to 3.18.  
Figure Appendix 3.13: Results obtained for the two samples harvested in the axial direction from 
the artery's intimal layer. The representative curve chosen was the data set subject to least 
scatter, and enveloped by other curves.  
Figure Appendix 3.14: Results obtained for the two samples harvested in the circumferential 
direction from the artery's intimal layer. The representative curve chosen was the curve from 
the most trained specimen, experiencing maximum extension.  
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
Strain (%) 
Media Axial Sample 1, Run 1 Media Axial Sample 1, Run 2 
Media Axial Sample 1, Run 3 Media Axial Sample 1, Run 4 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 
Strain (%) 
Media Circumferential Sample 1, Run 1 
Figure Appendix 3.15: Results obtained for the one sample harvested in the axial direction from 
the artery's medial layer. The representative curve chosen was the curve from the most trained 
specimen, experiencing maximum extension.  
Figure Appendix 3.16: Results obtained for the one sample harvested in the circumferential 
direction from the artery's medial layer. Only one successful run from this sample could be 
achieved (post training).  
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 
Strain (%) 
Adventitia Circumferential Sample 1, Run 1 
Adventitia Circumferential Sample 2, Run 1 
Adventitia Circumferential Sample 3, Run 1 
Adventitia Circumferential Sample 3, Run 2 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
Strain (%) 
Adventitia Axial Sample 1, Run 1 Adventitia Axial Sample 1, Run 2 
Adventitia Axial Sample 2, Run 1 Adventitia Axial Sample 2, Run 2 
Adventitia Axial Sample 2, Run 3 
Figure Appendix 3.17: Results obtained for the two samples harvested in the axial direction from 
the artery's adventitial layer. The representative curve chosen was the curve experiencing 
maximum extension and least subject to erroneous data points.  
Figure Appendix 3.18:  Results obtained for the three samples harvested in the circumferential 
direction from the artery's adventitial layer. Sample 2 was chosen to be representative as its 
data curve was enveloped by the curves obtained for both sample 1 and 3. 
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
Curve chosen to be representative of the data set shown 
Appendix 4 - Determination of Nitinol material 
parameters 
This section details the process by which Auricchio Nitinol material parameters can 
be derived from uniaxial stress-strain data.  
Appendix 5  Lutz number equation derivation  
The Lutz number is an assessment of ring stiffness. It was first proposed by Dr Karl-
Lutz Lauterjung, inventor of the Anaconda ring stent design. Since its development, 
the Lutz number has been used by Terumo Vascutek as a key design parameter. 
Through adopting the parameter into this thesis, a method was established by 
which the rings used within the vascular testing programme (chapter 3) could be 
related to those used by Vascutek within the Anaconda device.   
Here, a derivation for the Lutz number is provided, as proposed by Dr William 
Dempster from the University of Strathclyde. Although, fundamentally, the method 
relies on linear elastic beam bending theory, it is seen as reasonable approach to 
broadly define the stiffness of rings.  
Within the derivation, the aim is to relate 'Ring Stiffness' to Ring diameter, D and 
wire diameter, d. 
Consider a fine wire ring, approximated as being a simply supported beam with an 
evenly distributed load. 
Where W  =  Total Load 
 D = Ring Diameter (approximated as beam length) 
 d = Wire Diameter 
  = Deflection  
From beam bending theory, deflections for the configuration shown is given by 
The beam stiffness,  , can then be defined as follows  
This relationship is limited to small deflections and the given boundary conditions. 
However, in general, the stiffness K can be approximated to be a function of 
parameters E,    and D, independent of boundary conditions and degrees of 
freedom as follows 
Given that for a circular cross section,  , can be expressed as    
From this is can be seen that the stiffness K, is in general, dependent on the 
parameter group,  
For a given ring constructed from Nitinol wire of elastic modulus E 
Finally, the combined stiffness for a bundle of wires, with a number of turns ,N can 
be expressed as 
 Comparing this with equation 3.2, page 59, it can be seen that the stiffness K above 
is equivalent to the Lutz number of the ring. 
Appendix 6 - Python scripts  
This section provides the final python scripts as developed for the integrated 
modelling framework (figure 4.15). Annotations are provided for description. 
Further details around the operation and structure of these scripts can be found in 
chapter 4.  
Appendix 6.1 - Parameter file 
# Define Wire Constants 
# Ring diameter is defined  
rd = 25.0 
# Wire diameter is defined  
wd = 0.18 
# Ring radius is calculated 
rr = rd/2 
# Wire radius is calculated 
wr = wd/2 
l = (pi/2)*(rr) 
#Derived constants 
# this file makes the vessel and also applies the contact conditions. 
# Vod= vessel outside diameter, Vt vessel Thickness, Vl= vessel Length 
Vod = 26.0 
Vt = 1.00 
Vl =45 
# Derived Properties 
Vor =  Vod/2 
Vir = Vod/2-Vt 
# -*- coding: mbcs -*-, Abaqus python library imports, 
# within this coding clock, python library imports are performed 
# this enables Abaqus to interpret python commands. 
from part import * 
from material import * 
from section import * 
from assembly import * 
from step import * 
from interaction import * 
from load import * 
from mesh import * 
from job import * 
from sketch import * 
from visualization import * 
from connectorBehavior import * 
import regionToolset 
import datetime 
from datetime import * 
import math 
Appendix 6.2 - Continuum element wire script 
# The cross section is sketched as a 2D plane. 
mdb.models['Model-1'].ConstrainedSketch(name='__profile__', sheetSize=200.0) 
mdb.models['Model-
1'].sketches['__profile__'].CircleByCenterPerimeter(center=(0.0, 0.0), point1=(0, 
# The 2D plane is extruded into a wire strand 
mdb.models['Model-1'].Part(dimensionality=THREE_D, name='Wire', type= 
    DEFORMABLE_BODY) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].BaseSolidExtrude(depth=l, sketch= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__']) 
del mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'] 
# Datum planes are created for to assist the application  
# of boundary conditions and meshing procedures 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].DatumPlaneByPrincipalPlane(offset=0.0,  
    principalPlane=XYPLANE)  
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].DatumPlaneByPrincipalPlane(offset=0.0,  
    principalPlane=YZPLANE) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].DatumPlaneByPrincipalPlane(offset=0.0,  
    principalPlane=XZPLANE) 
# The wire is sectioned through partitions 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].PartitionCellByDatumPlane(cells= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].cells.getSequenceFromMask(('[#1 ]', ),  
    ), datumPlane=mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].datums[3]) 
l is cre
l is se
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].PartitionCellByDatumPlane(cells= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].cells.getSequenceFromMask(('[#3 ]', ),  
    ), datumPlane=mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].datums[4]) 
# Materials are created, the first of which is a linear elastic model 
#mdb.models['Model-1'].Material(name='simpleelastic') 
#mdb.models['Model-1'].materials['simpleelastic'].Elastic(table=((30000000.0,  
    #0.3), )) 
#Superelastic Nitinol is defined 
mdb.models['Model-1'].Material(name='ABQ_SUPER_ELASTIC_1') 
mdb.models['Model-1'].materials['ABQ_SUPER_ELASTIC_1'].Depvar(n=24) 
##mdb.models['Model-1'].materials['ABQ_SUPER_ELASTIC_1'].UserMaterial( 
##    mechanicalConstants=(65800.0, 0.435, 39700.0, 0.435, 0.0538, 5.74, 637,  
##    657, 0, 6.99, 327, 307, 853, 0.0538, 0.0)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].materials['ABQ_SUPER_ELASTIC_1'].UserMaterial( 
    mechanicalConstants=(65800.0, 0.435, 39700.0, 0.435, 0.0538, 5.74, 637,  
   657, 0, 6.99, 327, 307, 0, 0.0538, 0.0)) 
# Model sections are associated with material properties 
mdb.models['Model-
1'].HomogeneousSolidSection(material='ABQ_SUPER_ELASTIC_1', name= 
    'wire', thickness=None) 
# Assign section to part 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].SectionAssignment(offset=0.0, offsetField= 
    '', offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE, region=Region( 
    cells=mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].cells.getSequenceFromMask(mask=( 
    '[#f ]', ), )), sectionName='wire', thicknessAssignment=FROM_SECTION) 
# A wire instance is imported and orientated 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.DatumCsysByDefault(CARTESIAN) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=OFF, name='Wire-1', 
part= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire']) 
# rotate and move instance 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.rotate(angle=-90.0, axisDirection=(10.0,  
    0.0, 0.0), axisPoint=(0.0, 0.0, 0.0), instanceList=('Wire-1', )) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.translate(instanceList=('Wire-1', ), vector= 
    (0.0, -l/2, 0.0)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.rotate(angle=45.0, axisDirection=(0.0, 0.0,  
    10.0), axisPoint=(0.0, 0.0, 0.0), instanceList=('Wire-1', )) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.translate(instanceList=('Wire-1', ), vector= 
    (rr*cos(pi/4), rr*sin(pi/4), 0.0)) 
# Instance seed is provided (nodal positions along an edge)  
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.seedEdgeByNumber(constraint=FINER, 
edges= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].edges.getSequenceFromMask( 
    ('[#101a00 ]', ), ), number=2) 
#mesh instance 
# Model mesh properties are defined  
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.setElementType(elemTypes=(ElemType( 
    elemCode=C3D20R, elemLibrary=STANDARD), ElemType(elemCode=C3D15,  
    elemLibrary=STANDARD), ElemType(elemCode=C3D10, 
elemLibrary=STANDARD)),  
    regions=( 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].cells.getSequenceFromMask( 
    ('[#f ]', ), ), )) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.generateMesh(regions=( 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-1'], )) 
# Local coordinate system at the geometry centre of the wire is defined. 
# This coordinate is used for the application of boundary conditions 
# and post processing scripts 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.DatumCsysByThreePoints(coordSysType= 
    CARTESIAN, name='Datum csys-3', origin= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-1'].InterestingPoint( 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-1'].edges[0], MIDDLE),  
    point1=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-1'].vertices[1],  
    point2=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-1'].vertices[9]) 
ly is cre
l is se
l is m
 syste
# A single BC is applied at a node coinciding with the  
# geometric centre of the wire 
mdb.models['Model-1'].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET, 
createStepName='Initial',  
    distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName='', localCsys=None, name='HoldWireZ',  
    region=Region( 
    vertices=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].vertices.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#2 ]', ), )), u1=UNSET, u2=UNSET, u3=SET, ur1=UNSET, ur2=UNSET,  
    ur3=UNSET) 
# Surfaces are created to enable contact definitions 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].Surface(name='WireSurf', side1Faces= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].faces.getSequenceFromMask(('[#3014 ]',  
    ), )) 
Appendix 6.3 - Beam element wire script  
# 2D wire cross section is sketched  
mdb.models['Model-1'].ConstrainedSketch(name='__profile__', sheetSize=200.0) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].Line(point1=(0.0, 0.0), point2=( 
    l, 0.0)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].HorizontalConstraint( 
    addUndoState=False, entity= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].geometry[2]) 
# create part 
mdb.models['Model-1'].Part(dimensionality=THREE_D, name='Wire', type= 
    DEFORMABLE_BODY) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].BaseWire(sketch= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__']) 
#delete sketch 
del mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'] 
it rig
 is cre
rt is cre
# create material 
mdb.models['Model-1'].Material(name='ABQ_SUPER_ELASTIC_1') 
mdb.models['Model-1'].materials['ABQ_SUPER_ELASTIC_1'].Depvar(n=24) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].materials['ABQ_SUPER_ELASTIC_1'].UserMaterial( 
    mechanicalConstants=(65800.0, 0.3, 60000.0, 0.3, 0.05843, 1e-06, 567.34,  
    574.54, 22.0, 1e-05, 268.28, 259.92, 0.0, 0.05843, 0.0)) 
# create profile 
mdb.models['Model-1'].CircularProfile(name='Profile-1', r=wr) 
#create section 
mdb.models['Model-1'].BeamSection(integration=DURING_ANALYSIS, material= 
    'ABQ_SUPER_ELASTIC_1', name='WireSection', poissonRatio=0.3, profile= 
    'Profile-1', temperatureVar=LINEAR) 
#assign orrientation 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].MaterialOrientation(additionalRotationType= 
    ROTATION_NONE, axis=AXIS_1, fieldName='', localCsys=None, orientationType= 
    GLOBAL, region=Region( 
    edges=mdb.models['Model-
1'].parts['Wire'].edges.getSequenceFromMask(mask=( 
    '[#1 ]', ), )), stackDirection=STACK_3) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].assignBeamSectionOrientation(method= 
    N1_COSINES, n1=(0.0, 0.0, -1.0), region=Region( 
    edges=mdb.models['Model-
1'].parts['Wire'].edges.getSequenceFromMask(mask=( 
    '[#1 ]', ), ))) 
#assign section 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire'].SectionAssignment(offset=0.0, offsetField= 
    '', offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE, region=Region( 
    edges=mdb.models['Model-
1'].parts['Wire'].edges.getSequenceFromMask(mask=( 
    '[#1 ]', ), )), sectionName='WireSection', thicknessAssignment= 
    FROM_SECTION) 
l is cre
 is cre
#create instance 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.DatumCsysByDefault(CARTESIAN) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=OFF, name='Wire-1', 
part= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Wire']) 
# rotate and move instance 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.translate(instanceList=('Wire-1', ), vector= 
    (-l/2, 0.0, 0.0)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.rotate(angle=-45.0, axisDirection=(0.0,  
    0.0, 1.0), axisPoint=(0.0, 0.0, 0.0), instanceList=('Wire-1', )) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.translate(instanceList=('Wire-1', ), vector= 
    (rr*cos(pi/4), rr*sin(pi/4), 0.0)) 
#seed instance 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.seedEdgeByBias(biasMethod=DOUBLE,  
    constraint=FINER, endEdges= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].edges.getSequenceFromMask( 
    ('[#1 ]', ), ), maxSize=0.20, minSize=0.02) 
#chose element type 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.setElementType(elemTypes=(ElemType( 
    elemCode=B32H, elemLibrary=STANDARD), ), regions=( 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].edges.getSequenceFromMask( 
    ('[#1 ]', ), ), )) 
#generate mesh 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.generateMesh(regions=( 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-1'], )) 
 is cre
sitio
# specify transverse shear stifness remember contains area calculation 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sections['WireSection'].setValues(poissonRatio=0.3) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sections['WireSection'].TransverseShearBeam(k13=5636.7,  
    k23=5636.7, scfDefinition=ANALYSIS_DEFAULT) 
Appendix 6.4 - Holzapfel vessel script 
Vod = 30.6 
Vt = 3.0 
Vl =45 
# Derived Properties 
Vor =  Vod/2 
Vir = Vod/2-Vt 
# Intimae/media/advetitia ratios 
Ratio=[38.0,48.0,19.0] 
Ithick=Ratio[0]/(Ratio[1]+Ratio[0]+Ratio[2])*Vt 
Mthick=Ratio[1]/(Ratio[1]+Ratio[0]+Ratio[2])*Vt 
Athick=Ratio[2]/(Ratio[1]+Ratio[0]+Ratio[2])*Vt 
mdb.models['Model-1'].ConstrainedSketch(name='__profile__', sheetSize=200.0) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].ArcByCenterEnds(center=(0.0, 0.0) 
    , direction=CLOCKWISE, point1=(0.0, Vir), point2=(Vir, 0.0)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].ArcByCenterEnds(center=(0.0, 0.0) 
    , direction=CLOCKWISE, point1=(0.0, Vor), point2=(Vor, 0.0)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].Line(point1=(0.0, Vor), point2=( 
    0.0, Vir)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].Line(point1=(Vor, 0.0), point2=( 
    Vir, 0.0)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].Part(dimensionality=THREE_D, name='Vessel', type= 
    DEFORMABLE_BODY) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].BaseSolidExtrude(depth=Vl, sketch= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__']) 
del mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'] 
r is d
l ske
# Partion face 
mdb.models['Model-1'].ConstrainedSketch(gridSpacing=2.49, name='__profile__',  
    sheetSize=99.86, transform= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].MakeSketchTransform( 
    sketchPlane=mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].faces[4],  
    sketchPlaneSide=SIDE1,  
    sketchUpEdge=mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].edges[10],  
    sketchOrientation=LEFT, origin=(0.0, 0.0, Vl))) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].projectReferencesOntoSketch(filter= 
    COPLANAR_EDGES, sketch=mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__']) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].CircleByCenterPerimeter(center=( 
    0.0, 0.0), point1=(Vir+Ithick, 0.0)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].CoincidentConstraint( 
    addUndoState=False, entity1= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].vertices[5], entity2= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].geometry[3]) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].CircleByCenterPerimeter(center=( 
    0.0, 0.0), point1=(Vir+Mthick+Ithick, 0.0)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].CoincidentConstraint( 
    addUndoState=False, entity1= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].vertices[6], entity2= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].geometry[3]) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].PartitionFaceBySketch(faces= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].faces.getSequenceFromMask(('[#10 ]',  
    ), ), sketch=mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'],  
    sketchOrientation=LEFT, sketchUpEdge= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].edges[10]) 
del mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'] 
#Create Partition 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].PartitionCellByExtrudeEdge(cells= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].cells.getSequenceFromMask(('[#1 ]',  
    ), ), edges=(mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].edges[4], ), line= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].edges[14], sense=REVERSE) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].PartitionCellBySweepEdge(cells= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].cells.getSequenceFromMask(('[#2 ]',  
    ), ), edges=(mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].edges[13], ), sweepPath= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].edges[21]) 
l is p
rtitio
iscre
titia
rtitio
#create material 
mdb.models['Model-1'].Material(name='simpleelastic') 
mdb.models['Model-1'].materials['simpleelastic'].Elastic(table=((100000.0,  
    0.3), )) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].Material(name='Intimae') 
#mdb.models['Model-1'].materials['Intimae'].Hyperelastic(anisotropicType= 
#    HOLZAPFEL, localDirections=2, materialType=ANISOTROPIC, table=((0.00764,  
#    0.0, 0.9966, 524.6, 0.226), )) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].Material(name='Media') 
#mdb.models['Model-1'].materials['Media'].Hyperelastic(anisotropicType= 
#    HOLZAPFEL, localDirections=2, materialType=ANISOTROPIC, table=((0.00764,  
#    0.0, 0.9966, 524.6, 0.226), )) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].Material(name='Adventitia') 
#mdb.models['Model-1'].materials['Adventitia'].Hyperelastic(anisotropicType= 
#    HOLZAPFEL, localDirections=2, materialType=ANISOTROPIC, table=((0.00764,  
#    0.0, 0.9966, 524.6, 0.226), )) 
# Create Section 
mdb.models['Model-1'].HomogeneousSolidSection(material='simpleelastic', name= 
    'SimpleVessel', thickness=None) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].HomogeneousSolidSection(material='Intimae', name= 
    'IntimaeSec', thickness=None) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].HomogeneousSolidSection(material='Media', 
name='MediaSec',  
    thickness=None) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].HomogeneousSolidSection(material='Adventitia', name= 
    'AdvenSec', thickness=None) 
titia
# Section Assignment 
#mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].SectionAssignment(offset=0.0,  
#    offsetField='', offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE, region=Region( 
#    cells=mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].cells.getSequenceFromMask( 
#    mask=('[#1 ]', ), )), sectionName='Vessel', thicknessAssignment= 
#    FROM_SECTION) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].SectionAssignment(offset=0.0,  
    offsetField='', offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE, region=Region( 
    cells=mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].cells.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#2 ]', ), )), sectionName='IntimaeSec', thicknessAssignment= 
    FROM_SECTION) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].SectionAssignment(offset=0.0,  
    offsetField='', offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE, region=Region( 
    cells=mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].cells.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#1 ]', ), )), sectionName='MediaSec', thicknessAssignment= 
    FROM_SECTION) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].SectionAssignment(offset=0.0,  
    offsetField='', offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE, region=Region( 
    cells=mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].cells.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#4 ]', ), )), sectionName='AdvenSec', thicknessAssignment= 
    FROM_SECTION) 
#Creat Assembly 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.DatumCsysByDefault(CARTESIAN) 
#Import Instance 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=OFF, name='Vessel-1',  
    part=mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel']) 
# Move Instance 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.translate(instanceList=('Vessel-1', ), vector= 
    (0.0, 0.0, -Vl/2.0)) 
 is cre
# Seed Instance 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.seedPartInstance(deviationFactor=0.1,  
    regions=(mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-1'], ), size= 
#Change Element Type and Mesh 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.setElementType(elemTypes=(ElemType( 
    elemCode=C3D20H, elemLibrary=STANDARD), ElemType(elemCode=C3D15,  
    elemLibrary=STANDARD), ElemType(elemCode=C3D10, 
elemLibrary=STANDARD)),  
    regions=( 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-
1'].cells.getSequenceFromMask( 
    ('[#7 ]', ), ), )) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.generateMesh(regions=( 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-1'], )) 
# Apply boundary conditions (symmeteryish) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].XsymmBC(createStepName='Initial', name='Xhold', region= 
    Region( 
    faces=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-
1'].faces.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#2048 ]', ), ),  
    edges=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-
1'].edges.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#800 ]', ), ))) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].YsymmBC(createStepName='Initial', name='Yhold', region= 
    Region( 
    faces=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-
1'].faces.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#884 ]', ), ))) 
# Apply Z constraint... avoid rigid motion 
mdb.models['Model-1'].ZsymmBC(createStepName='Initial', name='HoldVesselZ',  
    region=Region( 
    faces=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-
1'].faces.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#20 ]', ), ))) 
# Create Vessel Contact Surface 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].Surface(name='VesselSurf', side1Faces= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].faces.getSequenceFromMask(( 
    '[#1000 ]', ), )) 
 is se
trica
ry co
Appendix 6.5 - Rigid and linear elastic vessel 
#Create vessel 
mdb.models['Model-1'].ConstrainedSketch(name='__profile__', sheetSize=200.0) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].ArcByCenterEnds(center=(0.0, 0.0) 
    , direction=CLOCKWISE, point1=(0.0, Vir), point2=(Vir, 0.0)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].ArcByCenterEnds(center=(0.0, 0.0) 
    , direction=CLOCKWISE, point1=(0.0, Vor), point2=(Vor, 0.0)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].Line(point1=(0.0, Vor), point2=( 
    0.0, Vir)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'].Line(point1=(Vor, 0.0), point2=( 
    Vir, 0.0)) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].Part(dimensionality=THREE_D, name='Vessel', type= 
    DEFORMABLE_BODY) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].BaseSolidExtrude(depth=Vl, sketch= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__']) 
del mdb.models['Model-1'].sketches['__profile__'] 
#create material 
mdb.models['Model-1'].Material(name='simpleelastic') 
mdb.models['Model-1'].materials['simpleelastic'].Elastic(table=((100000.0,  
    0.3), )) 
# Create Section 
mdb.models['Model-1'].HomogeneousSolidSection(material='simpleelastic', name= 
    'Vessel', thickness=None) 
# Section Assignment 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].SectionAssignment(offset=0.0,  
    offsetField='', offsetType=MIDDLE_SURFACE, region=Region( 
    cells=mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].cells.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#1 ]', ), )), sectionName='Vessel', thicknessAssignment= 
    FROM_SECTION) 
l ske
l is cre
 is cre
#Creat Assembly 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.DatumCsysByDefault(CARTESIAN) 
#Import Instance 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.Instance(dependent=OFF, name='Vessel-1',  
    part=mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel']) 
# Move Instance 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.translate(instanceList=('Vessel-1', ), vector= 
    (0.0, 0.0, -Vl/2.0)) 
# Seed Instance 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.seedPartInstance(deviationFactor=0.1,  
    regions=(mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-1'], ), size= 
#Change Element Type and Mesh 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.setElementType(elemTypes=(ElemType( 
    elemCode=C3D8R, elemLibrary=STANDARD, secondOrderAccuracy=OFF,  
    kinematicSplit=AVERAGE_STRAIN, hourglassControl=DEFAULT,  
    distortionControl=DEFAULT), ElemType(elemCode=C3D6, 
elemLibrary=STANDARD),  
    ElemType(elemCode=C3D4, elemLibrary=STANDARD)), regions=( 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-
1'].cells.getSequenceFromMask( 
    ('[#1 ]', ), ), )) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.generateMesh(regions=( 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-1'], )) 
ly is cre
 is se
# Apply boundary conditions (symmeter) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET, 
createStepName='Initial',  
    distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName='', localCsys=None, name='VesselBcY',  
    region=Region( 
    faces=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-
1'].faces.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#8 ]', ), )), u1=SET, u2=UNSET, u3=UNSET, ur1=UNSET, ur2=UNSET,  
    ur3=UNSET) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET, 
createStepName='Initial',  
    distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName='', localCsys=None, name='VesselBcX',  
    region=Region( 
    faces=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-
1'].faces.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#2 ]', ), )), u1=UNSET, u2=SET, u3=UNSET, ur1=UNSET, ur2=UNSET,  
    ur3=UNSET) 
# Apply Z constraint... avoid rigid motion 
mdb.models['Model-1'].ZsymmBC(createStepName='Initial', name='HoldVesselZ',  
    region=Region( 
    faces=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-
1'].faces.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#20 ]', ), ))) 
# Create Vessel Contact Surface 
mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].Surface(name='VesselSurf', side1Faces= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].parts['Vessel'].faces.getSequenceFromMask(('[#4 ]',  
    ), )) 
Appendix 6.6 - Proximal ring boundary condition set 
#select facenodes top end and create the region 
facenodes1=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].faces[11].getNodes() 
facenodes2=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].faces[3].getNodes() 
ry co
sitio
facenodes3=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].faces[14].getNodes() 
facenodes4=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].faces[7].getNodes() 
facenodes=facenodes1+facenodes2+facenodes3+facenodes4 
#create step 
mdb.models['Model-1'].StaticStep(name='Step1applylinebc', previous='Initial') 
mdb.models['Model-1'].steps['Step1applylinebc'].setValues(nlgeom=ON) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].steps['Step1applylinebc'].setValues(initialInc=0.05,  
    maxInc=0.05) 
#set constants 
Xpositionlist=[] 
Nlenght=len(facenodes) 
#pin base 
#mdb.models['Model-1'].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET, 
createStepName='Initial',  
    #distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName='', localCsys=None, name='pinbase',  
    #region=Region( 
    #faces=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].faces.getSequenceFromMask( 
    #mask=('[#8460 ]', ), )), u1=SET, u2=SET, u3=SET, ur1=UNSET, ur2=UNSET, ur3= 
    #UNSET) 
 is cre
#Cycle over nodes 
rotate=-math.atan(1) 
for i in range(0,Nlenght): 
    x=b+1 
    node=facenodes[(b):(x)] 
    print node[0] 
    region = regionToolset.Region(nodes=node) 
    nodecountstr=str(c) 
    nodelabel="node"+nodecountstr 
    BCx= -facenodes[i].coordinates[0] 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET, createStepName= 
        'Step1applylinebc', distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName='', fixed=OFF,  
        localCsys=None, name=nodelabel, region=region, u1=BCx, u2=UNSET, 
u3=UNSET, ur1=UNSET, ur2=UNSET,ur3=UNSET) 
#select facenodes top end and create the region 
facenodes1=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].faces[15].getNodes() 
facenodes2=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].faces[6].getNodes() 
facenodes3=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].faces[10].getNodes() 
facenodes4=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].faces[5].getNodes() 
facenodes=facenodes1+facenodes2+facenodes3+facenodes4 
#create step 
#mdb.models['Model-1'].StaticStep(name='Step1applylinebc2', 
previous='Step1applylinebc') 
#set constants 
Xpositionlist=[] 
Nlenght=len(facenodes) 
ry co
rc fro
sitio
#Cycle over nodes 
c=1000 
for i in range(0,Nlenght): 
    x=b+1 
    node=facenodes[(b):(x)] 
    print node[0] 
    region = regionToolset.Region(nodes=node) 
    nodecountstr=str(c) 
    nodelabel="node"+nodecountstr 
    BCy= -facenodes[i].coordinates[1] 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET, createStepName= 
        'Step1applylinebc', distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName='', fixed=OFF,  
        localCsys=None, name=nodelabel, region=region, u1=UNSET, u2=BCy, 
u3=UNSET, ur1=UNSET, ur2=UNSET,ur3=UNSET) 
Appendix 6.7 - Compaction definition 
# Select Nodes 
left=Region( 
    vertices=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].vertices.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#2 ]', ), )) 
right=Region( 
    vertices=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].vertices.getSequenceFromMask( 
    mask=('[#1 ]', ), )) 
# Define step 
mdb.models['Model-1'].StaticStep(name='Compaction', previous= 
    'Step1applylinebc') 
mdb.models['Model-1'].steps['Compaction'].setValues(initialInc=0.05, maxInc= 
    0.05) 
ry co
# apply bc's 
mdb.models['Model-1'].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET, createStepName= 
    'Compaction', distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName='', fixed=OFF, localCsys= 
    None, name='pullleft', region=left, u1=UNSET, u2=UNSET, u3=10.05, ur1=UNSET, 
ur2=UNSET,  
    ur3=UNSET) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET, createStepName= 
    'Compaction', distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName='', fixed=OFF, localCsys= 
    None, name='pullright', region=right, u1=UNSET, u2=UNSET, u3=-10.05, 
ur1=UNSET, ur2=UNSET,  
    ur3=UNSET) 
# release wire in z direction (deactivate z = 0 on vertice created) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].boundaryConditions['HoldWireZ'].deactivate('Compaction') 
Appendix 6.8 - Contact definitions 
#Release and contact 
#create interaction step,release compaction 
mdb.models['Model-1'].StaticStep(initialInc=0.05, minInc=1e-06, maxInc=0.05, 
name='Release',  
    previous='Compaction') 
#create interaction properties 
mdb.models['Model-1'].ContactProperty('VesselWireProp') 
mdb.models['Model-
1'].interactionProperties['VesselWireProp'].TangentialBehavior( 
    formulation=FRICTIONLESS) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].interactionProperties['VesselWireProp'].NormalBehavior( 
    allowSeparation=ON, clearanceAtZeroContactPressure=0.0,  
    constraintEnforcementMethod=PENALTY, contactStiffness=DEFAULT,  
    contactStiffnessScaleFactor=1.0, pressureOverclosure=HARD,  
    stiffnessBehavior=LINEAR) 
ry co
# create interaction 
mdb.models['Model-1'].SurfaceToSurfaceContactStd(adjustMethod=NONE,  
    clearanceRegion=None, createStepName='Release', datumAxis=None,  
    initialClearance=OMIT, interactionProperty='VesselWireProp', master= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Vessel-1'].surfaces['VesselSurf'] 
    , name='VesselWire', slave= 
    mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-1'].surfaces['WireSurf'] 
    , sliding=FINITE, thickness=ON) 
# Set solver to unsymetric 
mdb.models['Model-1'].steps['Release'].setValues(matrixSolver=DIRECT,  
    matrixStorage=UNSYMMETRIC) 
## quick fix on rigid movement 
#edgenodes= mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].edges[0].getNodes() 
#node=edgenodes[153:154] 
#noderegion = regionToolset.Region(nodes=node) 
#mdb.models['Model-1'].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET, createStepName= 
                #'Release', distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName='', fixed=OFF,  
                #localCsys=None, name="PinMiddle", region=noderegion, u1=UNSET, 
u2=UNSET, u3=0.0, ur1=UNSET, ur2=UNSET,ur3=UNSET) 
### Release of top node 
mdb.models['Model-1'].boundaryConditions['pullright'].deactivate('Release') 
mdb.models['Model-1'].boundaryConditions['pullleft'].deactivate('Release') 
### Pin middle node 
##z=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-1'].edges[7].getNodes() 
##zz=len(z) 
##k=0 
##for i in range(0,zz): 
##    f=z[i].coordinates[0] 
##    ff=round(f,2) 
##    g=z[i].coordinates[1] 
##    gg=round(g,2) 
##    if gg == ff: 
##        label=z[i].label 
##        oo=i+1 
##        middlenode=z[(i):(oo)] 
##myRegion = regionToolset.Region(nodes=middlenode) 
##mdb.models['Model-1'].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET, createStepName= 
##        'Release', distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName='', fixed=OFF,  
##        localCsys=None, name="pinmiddle", region=myRegion, u1=UNSET, 
u2=UNSET, u3=0.0, ur1=UNSET, ur2=UNSET,ur3=UNSET) 
Appendix 6.9 - Pin centre node of proximal ring script 
#mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-1'].edges[1].getNodes() 
angle=cos(math.radians(45)) 
xco=angle*rr 
xco=round(angle*rr,2) 
 is id
tifie
wiren=len(mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-1'].edges) 
for i in range(0,wiren): 
    z=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-1'].edges[i].getNodes() 
    if i ==0: 
    else: 
        GG+=z 
zz=len(GG) 
for i in range(0,zz): 
    f=z[i].coordinates[0] 
    ff=round(f,2) 
    g=z[i].coordinates[1] 
    gg=round(g,2) 
    m=g=z[i].coordinates[2] 
    mm=round(m,1) 
    if mm == 0.0: 
        if gg==xco: 
            if gg == ff: 
                label=z[i].label 
                oo=i+1 
                middlenode=z[(i):(oo)] 
                iii=ff 
myRegion = regionToolset.Region(nodes=middlenode) 
mdb.models['Model-1'].DisplacementBC(amplitude=UNSET, createStepName= 
        'Release', distributionType=UNIFORM, fieldName='', fixed=OFF,  
        localCsys=None, name="pinmiddle", region=myRegion, u1=UNSET, u2=UNSET, 
u3=0.0, ur1=UNSET, ur2=UNSET,ur3=UNSET) 
ry co
 is se
 is id
tifie
Appendix 6.10 - Element stress/strain history 
Element history (provides stress output for all nodes within an element for the 
entire simulation) 
from odbAccess import * 
import math 
bob=openOdb(path='C:/Users/lau06178/Desktop/Comparison Solid run 
10/10solidcomparison6.odb') 
mdb = openMdb('C:\\Users\\lau06178\\Desktop\\Comparison Solid run 
10\\10solidcomparison6.cae') 
##### select step to analyse 
step=bob.steps[bob.steps.keys()[-3]] 
frame=step.frames[-1] 
outputs=frame.fieldOutputs 
stress=outputs['S'] 
wireelements= stress.baseElementTypes[0] 
Mises=[] 
Mises1=[] 
Elementlabel=[] 
Misesi=0; 
Misesi2=0; 
Elementlabeli=1 
ElementType=str 
# i lenght 
ilen=len(stress.values) 
for i in range (0,ilen): 
    Elementlabeli = stress.values[i].elementLabel 
    EType = stress.values[i].baseElementType 
    if EType == 'C3D20R': 
        if Elementlabeli == ET: 
            Misesi=stress.values[i].mises 
            if Misesi >= Misesi2: 
                Misesi2=Misesi 
                label=stress.values[i].elementLabel 
        else: 
            ET = Elementlabeli 
            Mises.append(Misesi2) 
 lists a
            Elementlabel.append(label) 
            Misesi2=0 
 #find Element Locations 
nlen=len(Mises) 
Welements=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-1'].elements 
Enodes=mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].elements[1].connectivity 
Enodelen=len(mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].elements[1].connectivity) 
sumx=0 
sumy=0 
sumz=0 
avrgx=0 
avrgy=0 
avrgz=0 
nodes=[] 
for i in range(0,nlen): 
    for w in range (0,Enodelen): 
        nodes.append(mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].elements[Elementlabel[i]].connectivity[w]) 
    for c in range (0,Enodelen): 
        sumx=sumx+mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].nodes[nodes[c]].coordinates[0] 
        sumy=sumy+mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].nodes[nodes[c]].coordinates[1] 
        sumz=sumz+mdb.models['Model-1'].rootAssembly.instances['Wire-
1'].nodes[nodes[c]].coordinates[2] 
    avrgx=sumx/Enodelen 
    avrgy=sumy/Enodelen 
    avrgz=sumz/Enodelen 
    x.append(avrgx) 
    y.append(avrgy) 
    z.append(avrgz) 
    sumx=0 
r tim
    sumy=0 
    sumz=0 
    avrgx=0 
    avrgy=0 
    avrgz=0 
    nodes=[] 
### Convert locations to get the a horizontal profile of the beam. 
xhor=[] 
yhor=[] 
Miseshor=[] 
Elementlabelhor=[] 
for i in range (0,nlen): 
    alpha=atan(y[i]/x[i]) 
    beta=alpha+math.pi/4 
    r=math.sqrt(math.pow(x[i],2)+math.pow(y[i],2)) 
    conx=r*cos(beta) 
    cony=r*sin(beta) 
    xhor.append(conx) 
    yhor.append(cony) 
### select highest value along the x direction to form profile. 
Misesi2=0 
Miseshor=[] 
Elementlabelhor=[] 
xhorprofile=0 
xhorlist=[] 
labelcheck=110000000 
for i in range (0,500): 
    for w in range (0,nlen): 
        if (-14.4+c) < xhor[w] < (-14.3+c): 
            if Mises[w] >= Misesi2: 
                Misesi2=Mises[w] 
                label=Elementlabel[w] 
                xhorprofile=xhor[w] 
    if not label == labelcheck: 
s, stre
ss lo
t is se
        Miseshor.append(Misesi2) 
        Elementlabelhor.append(label) 
        xhorlist.append(xhorprofile) 
        Misesi2=0 
        labelcheck = label 
    c+=.1 
#if (0-l/2+l*(i/100.00)) < x[w] < 0-l/2+l*((i+1)/100.00): 
#store xhor 
xlist=[] 
xlists=() 
i=len(xhorlist) 
for b in range (0,i): 
    xlist.append(str(xhorlist[b])+"\n") 
xlists=xlist 
text_file=open("XhorlistMvz.txt","w") 
text_file.write("who is your daddy\n") 
text_file.writelines(xlists) 
text_file.close() 
#Store Mises 
ylist=[] 
ylists=() 
for b in range (0,i): 
    ylist.append(str(Miseshor[b])+"\n") 
ylists=ylist 
text_file=open("Miseshor.txt","w") 
text_file.write("who is your daddy\n") 
text_file.writelines(ylists) 
text_file.close() 
t file
#Store z 
zlist=[] 
zlists=() 
for b in range (0,i): 
    zlist.append(str(Elementlabelhor[b])+"\n") 
zlists=zlist 
text_file=open("labelhor.txt","w") 
text_file.write("who is your daddy\n") 
text_file.writelines(zlists) 
text_file.close() 
#The.end 
lists a
t file
