ProQuest Dissertations
initiation of Vertebrate Limb Deveiopment
Martin J. Cohn
Thesis submitted for the degree of Ph. D.
Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology 
University College London 
University of London 
ProQuest Number: 10045536
All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS 
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript 
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.
uest.
ProQuest 10045536
Published by ProQuest LLC(2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
Microform Edition  ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC 
789 East Eisenhower Parkway 
P.O. Box 1346 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346
ABSTRACT
Development of paired appendages at appropriate levels along the 
body axis characterizes the jawed vertebrate body plan. Molecular networks 
that operate within limb buds have received much attention, although very 
little is known about how limb budding is initiated. Here I show that beads 
soaked in Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) and placed in prospective flank of 
chick embryos induce formation of ectopic limb buds, which contain their 
own signaling regions and develop into complete limbs. Application of FGF 
to anterior flank induces ectopic wings, and FGF applied to posterior flank 
induces ectopic legs. Hox genes are good candidates for encoding position 
in lateral plate mesoderm along the body axis, and thus determining where 
limbs form. If particular combinations of Hox gene expression determine 
where wings and legs develop, then formation of additional limbs from flank 
should involve changes in Hox gene expression which reflect the type of 
limb induced. Here I show that the same population of flank cells can be 
induced to form wing or leg. Induction of ectopic limbs is accompanied by 
specific changes in expression of 3 Hox genes in lateral plate mesoderm 
which reproduce, in the flank, expression patterns found at normal limb 
levels. Together, these results suggest that local production of FGF may 
initiate limb development, and that Hox gene expression may specify limb 
position.
Pythons lack forelimbs, have vestigial hindlimbs, and regional 
specialization of the axial skeleton has been lost. I have examined patterns 
of Hox gene expression in python embryos, and show that the uniform 
pattern of vertebrae is associated with uniform Hox gene expression. 
Transplantation experiments and analysis of gene expression in python 
hindlimbs suggest that limb development is arrested due to failed apical
ridge formation. Absence of a ridge in pythons may result from failure of limb 
ectoderm to respond to mesenchymal signals.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Professor Cheryll Tickle, my supervisor, for 
accepting me as her student and taking me under her extra wing. I am 
grateful to Cheryll for teaching, inspiring and encouraging me during my 
Ph.D. in her laboratory. I would also like to thank Professor Lewis Wolpert 
for many stimulating discussions and enthusiastic support for the project. 
Many thanks to Dr. Ketan Patel for being an excellent collaborator, teacher 
and friend. I am grateful to Dr. Ronald Nittenberg for tremendous friendship, 
for translating papers, and for many great discussions.
I would also like to thank Prof. John Heath, Dr. Helen Abud, Dr. Juan 
Carlos Izpisa-Belmonte, Dr. Jon Clarke, Dr. Robb Krumlauf and Dr. David 
Wilkinson, with whom I collaborated on various aspects of this project. I am 
grateful to Dr. Mike Coates for sharing his wealth of knowledge, for a terrific 
and what I hope will be a long-lasting collaboration, and for many "Dead" 
discussions. Thanks to Dr. Susan Evans for sharing her knowledge of 
reptiles. Many thanks to Esther Wenman of London Zoo, John Foden of 
Drayton Manor Zoo, Nick Jackson of The Welsh Mountain Zoo, and Miranda 
Stevenson of Edinburgh Zoo for generously providing me with fertile python 
eggs. Thanks also to past and present members of the lab, for creating a 
wonderful working environment.
I would like to thank Prof. Owen Lovejoy for continuous 
encouragement, support and friendship. I would also like to thank Adam 
Levine, the Cosmic Charlies, the Levine family and the Bright family for 
making London feel like home.
Special thanks to my parents and brothers for their endless support 
and encouragement. Finally, I thank Philippa for supporting and tolerating 
This work was supported by the BBSRC and Action Research.
CONTENTS
ABSTRACT 1
ACKNOW LEDGEMENTS 3
CHAPTER ONE: General Introduction
1. Structure of the limb 1 0
2. Patterning the anteroposterior axis of the limb 1 1
2.1 Polarizing activity in urodele amphibians 1 8
2.2 Molecular basis of polarizing activity 2 0
2.2.1 Retinoic acid 2 0
2.2.2 Sonic hedgehog 2 1
2.2.3 Hox genes in limbs 2 4
3. Proximodistal outgrowth and patterning 2 8
3.1 The apical ectodermal ridge 2 8
3.2 Molecular basis of ridge signaling 3 2
3.2.1 Fibroblast growth factors 3 2
3.3 The progress zone 3 4
3.4 Candidate molecules expressed
in the progress zone 3 4
4. Dorsoventral polarity 3 5
5. Evolutionary conservation of signaling networks 3 8
6. Patterning the primary body axis 4 0
6.1 Hox genes 4 0
6.2. Hox genes and axial patterning. 44
6.3 Retinoids, limbs and the body plan 4 5
7. How are limbs induced? 4 6
7.1 Ectopic limb development 4 9
7.2 Initiation of limb budding 4 9
CHAPTER TWO: Materials and Methods
1. Application of FGF beads to chick embryos 5 2
2. Application of SHH beads to chick embryos 5 2
3. Application of retinoic acid beads to chick embryos 5 3
4. Whoie-mount skeletal preparations:
Aldan green staining 5 3
5. Whoie-mount skeletal preparations:
Alcian blue and Alizarin red staining 5 4
6. Scanning Electron Microscopy 5 4
7. Whoie-mount in situ hybridization 5 5
8. Tissue transplantations 5 5
9. lontophoretic application of Dil and DiAsp 5 6
10. Dig-FGF2 5 7
11. Microinjection of Dig-FGF2 5 7
12. Antibody staining 5 8
12a. Whoie-mount antibody staining 5 8
12b. Antibody staining frozen sections 6 0
13. Nile Blue Sulphate staining 61
CHAPTER THREE: FGF and Limb initiation
1. Background 6 2
2. Results 6 3
2.1 FGF beads induce additional limbs in
chick embryos 6 3
2.2 Identity and morphological pattern of
additional limbs 6 4
2.3 Early development of additional buds 7 0
2.4 FGF acts within two hours 7 3
2.5 Molecular polarity of early buds 7 7
2.6 Competence of flank cells to express Shh 8 0
2.7 Application of SHH to the flank 8 4
2.8 Application of FGF2 and SHH to the flank 8 5
3. Discussion 92
3.1 initiation of a Limb by Application of FGF 9 2
3.2 Reversed Polarity of the Additional Limbs 9 3
3.3 Establishment of the polarizing region 9 4
3.4 Which FGF member initiates limb
development in the normal embryo? 9 7
3.5 Control of limb position 9 9
3.6 Molecular basis of limb induction 9 9
CHAPTER FOUR: Hox Genes and Specification Of Limbs
Background 101
Results 102
2.1 Cell lineage in ectopic wings and legs 1 02
2.2 Dynamics of Hoxb9 expression in
lateral plate mesoderm 106
2.3 Comparative analysis of Hoxb9, Hoxc9 and
Hoxd9 in lateral plate mesoderm 107
2.4 Hox9 gene expression and induction
of ectopic limbs 108
2.5 Application of FGF to paraxial mesoderm 117
2.6 Effects of retinoic acid on Hoxb9
expression at wing level 121
2.7 Hoxb9 boundaries and cell lineage in
the wing bud 121
2.6 Loss of Hoxb9 expression in posterior limb buds 125
scussion 129
3.1 Hox gene expression specifies limb position 129
3.2 The polarizing region pathway is
independent of Hoxb9 130
3.3 Hoxb9 is reduced by local signals
in the limb bud 130
3.4 Hox genes and the evolution of paired
appendages 131
CHAPTER FIVE: Developmental Analysis of Limblessness 
and Axial Patterning in Python Embryos
1. Background 133
2. Results 135
2.1 Segmental identity in the python axial skeleton 136
2.2 Morphology of python limbs 142
2.3 Early development of the python hindlimb bud 145
2.4 Gene expression in the python limb ectoderm 151
2.5 Polarizing activity in python limbs and flank 155
2.6 Python SHH expression can be rescued by
a chick apical ridge 156
2.7 Failure of apical ridge formation in
python limb buds 160
3. Discussion
3.1 Hox gene expression and regionalization 164
of the python body axis 164
3.2 Dorsoventral position of the hindlimb 166
3.3 Failure of hindlimb development 166
3.4 Rescuing snake limb development 169
3.5 Evolution of the snake body plan 170
CHAPTER SIX: General Discussion
1. FGF as limb initiation signal 174
2. Positioning FGF along the body axis 174
3. Reprograming Hox expression in the flank 176
4. Implications for co-ordinating axial patterning 177
5. Evolution of body plans 178
References iso
LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES
CHAPTER ONE
Figure 1. The Zone of Polarizing Activity (ZPA) patterns
the anteroposterior axis of the limb 17
Figure 2. The Apical Ectodermal Ridge (AER)
maintains proximodistal outrowth of the limb 3 1
Figure 3. Hox gene cluster diversity and evolution 4 3
CHAPTER THREE
Table 1. Effects of beads soaked in FGF2 and implanted
into the lateral plate mesoderm of chick embryos 6 7
Figure 4. Additional limbs produced by application of
FGF2 beads to the flank 6 9
Figure 5. Scanning electron micrograph of embryo with
ectopic limb bud 48 hours after bead implantation 7 2
Figure 6. Distribution of Digoxigenin-tagged FGF2 after
application to the chick flank 7 6
Figure 7: Sonic hedgehog and Hoxd13 are expressed in
additional limb buds 7 9
Figure 8. Activation of Shh in flank cells transplanted
under the apical ridge 8 3
Table 2. Effects of mSHH198 beads applied to
lateral plate mesoderm of chick embryos 8 7
Figure 9. Skeletal malformations induced by application of
SHH protein to the flank 8 9
Figure 10. Application of SHH beads to posterior flank alters
patterning of the leg 91
CHAPTER FOUR
Figure 11. FGF induces bidirectional transformations in
flank cell fate to induce ectopic wings and legs 105
Figure 12. HoxbQ expression during normal chick development 112
Figure 13. Expression of Hox group 9 paralogues in lateral plate
mesoderm of normal chick embryos 114
Figure 14. Expression of Hox group 9 paralogues in chick
embryos treated with FGF to induce ectopic limbs 116
Figure 15. /-/oxb9 expression in chick embryo 48 hous after
application of FGF to paraxial mesoderm 119
Table 3. Effects of FGF on Hox gene expression
in lateral plate mesoderm of the chick 120
Figure 16. Analysis of cell lineage and Hoxb9 expression
in the posterior wing bud. 124
Figure 17. Regulation of Hoxb9 in the chick leg bud and flank 128
CHAPTER FIVE
Figure 18. Morphological pattern in the python axial skeleton 139
Figure 19. Comparative Hox gene expression in python and
chick embryos. 141
Figure 20. Morphological pattern in python limbs 144
Figure 21. Scanning electron micrographs of python limb buds 148
Figure 22. Cell death in python limb buds 150
Figure 23. Gene expression in limb bud ectoderm 154
Figure 24. Polarizing activity in python limb buds 159
Figure 25. Dorsoventral polarity in python limb buds 163
Figure 26. Developmental model for evolution of the snake
body plan 173
CHAPTER ONE: General Introduction
In virtually all vertebrates, two pairs of limb buds form from lateral 
plate mesoderm at particular axial levels and grow out to form the limbs. 
Once limb buds have formed, tissue interactions within them lead to 
morphogenesis and patterning, and the buds develop almost autonomously 
into limbs. Considerable progress has been made in understanding the 
cellular and molecular basis of limb pattern formation, but the problem of 
how limb buds are initiated has remained poorly understood. The focus of 
this thesis is the cellular and molecular interactions in the chick embryo that 
initiate the process of limb development. The main problems to be 
addressed are: How are limbs induced? What controls the position at which 
budding is initiated? How is limb identity determined? What controls the 
number of limbs that develop?
This thesis is also directed towards understanding the developmental 
mechanisms that underlie the limbless condition in snakes. Pythons fail to 
initiate forelimb development, yet well-developed hindlimb buds are induced 
adjacent to the cloaca. These buds give rise to rudimentary hindlimbs 
because subsequent outgrowth is not maintained. These changes are 
associated with major changes to the body plan during snake evolution. 
Here I explore limb development and patterning of the axial skeleton , and 
their relationship to one another in python embryonic development.
1. Structure of the limb
A defining characteristic of tetrapod body plan is the presence of 
paired limbs at two positions along the primary body (head to tail) axis. Each 
limb is made-up of three segments, the zeugopod (humerus in the forelimb 
[f], femur in the hindlimb [h]), the stylopod (ulna and radius [f], tibia and
fibula [h]) and autopod (carpals, metacarpals and phalanges [f], tarsals, 
metatarsals and phalanges [h]). These structures are organized and 
patterned along three axes. For example, in the fore limb, the proximal to 
distal axis extends from the humerus to the digits, the anterior to posterior 
axis extends from thumb and radial side of the limb to the small finger and 
ulnar side of the limb, and the dorsal to ventral axis extends from the back 
(extensor) surface of the hand to the palmar (flexor) surface of the hand. 
During embryonic development, the limb skeleton and tendons are derived 
from lateral plate mesoderm which emerges from a body wall as a bud of 
undifferentiated mesenchyme cells surrounded by a layer of ectoderm. Limb 
muscle forms from paraxial mesoderm cells which migrate into the limb bud, 
and the limb is innervated by axons that migrate from the spinal cord at 
approximately the same anteroposterior level as the limb bud. Cellular 
interactions involving both long-range and short-range signaling are 
involved in organizing cells in the limb bud mesenchyme into structures that 
form an integrated and functional anatomical system. The following 
sections will introduce the cellular and molecular nature of the interactions 
that occur within the limb bud after it emerges from the body wall. The 
second part of this introduction will cover the earlier events of induction and 
initiation of limb budding.
2. Patterning the anteroposterior axis of the limb
Patterning of the limb is organized by specialized signaling centers 
that communicate with other cells to inform them of their position or 
otherwise influence their behavior. Signaling regions act by secreting 
signaling molecules over long or short distances, and these signals are 
interpreted by responding cells. Wolpert formulated the French flag problem 
to demonstrate how cells located at different positions within a morphogen 
gradient can respond differentially to morphogen concentration (Wolpert,
1969)  According to the model, cells receiving a high dose
of morphogen have their position specified and interpret this to differentiate 
into blue cells, a lower dose induces white cells and an even lower dose 
induces red cells, so that the population of cells is programed to make a 
French flag pattern by responding differentially to a single chemical. 
Similarly, cells within the limb must be informed of their position and interpret 
this information to differentiate into the appropriate structures, so that a 
thumb develops anteriorly and a small finger develops posteriorly. The 
region of cells with the ability to polarize the anteroposterior axis is called the 
zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) or polarizing region. Saunders and 
Gasseling demonstrated that this group of cells, located at the posterior edge 
of the chick wing bud, could induce a mirror-image duplicated pattern of 
digits when transplanted to the anterior edge of the bud (Fig. 1) (Saunders 
and Gasseling, 1968). The normal pattern of digits in the chick wing is 2-3-4, 
reading from anterior to posterior (digits 1 and 5 have been lost during 
evolution of the avian wing) (Hinchliffe, 1985). Transplantation of posterior 
limb cells to the anterior results in a pattern of digits reading 4-3-2-2-3-4 from 
anterior to posterior.
Tickle et al. suggested that the polarizing region is a source of a 
diffusible morphogen which patterns the limb in a concentration-dependent 
manner (Tickle, Summerbell, and Wolpert, 1975). According to the model, 
the concentration of morphogen, which decreases with distance from the 
polarizing region, determines the positional address of the cell, such that 
cells adjacent to the polarizing region receive a high dose of morphogen 
and acquire a posterior positional value. This value will ultimately be 
translated into a differentiation program that results in formation of a digit 
with a posterior identity. This model implies that cells can respond 
differentially to threshold levels of morphogen. Cells situated further from the
polarizing region are exposed to a lower dose of morphogen due to 
diffusion, and thus, lower threshold responses are activated resulting in 
more anterior positional values. This model also explains the effects of a 
polarizing region graft; when an additional polarizing region is grafted 
anteriorly, the new polarizing region acts as a new source of morphogen 
which is distributed in a gradient opposite that which is normally present. 
Under these experimental conditions, cells at the anterior and posterior 
extremes of the limb would be exposed to high concentrations of morphogen 
and form posterior digits, and as the gradients decrease towards the apex of 
the limb bud, more anterior digits would be specified. Thus, the 
concentration of morphogen along the anterior to posterior axis of the limb 
bud would be high-medium-low-low-medium-high, corresponding to a 
morphological pattern of 4-S-2-2-3-4. This explanation is consistent with the 
pattern of digit duplication being affected by changing the position of the 
polarizing region graft. When the grafted polarizing region is moved closer 
to the apex of the bud (shortening the distance between the two polarizing 
regions), the gradients of morphogen intersect before either drops below the 
level needed to induce anterior digits, and thus anterior digits are eliminated 
from the pattern (Tickle, Summerbell, and Wolpert, 1975). Cells respond to 
duration of exposure as well as concentration of morphogen. Smith showed 
that removal of the polarizing region at different time points affected the 
extent of duplication; longer exposure to the signal resulted in induction of 
more posterior digits (Smith, 1980). Thus, the polarizing region appears to 
influence anteroposterior patterning of the limb by a mechanism involving 
dose and time of exposure to a morphogen secreted by this specialized 
group of cells.
Polarizing activity can be defined quantitatively according to the 
strength of the polarizing signal. Tickle quantified the number of cells
required to polarize the limb and found that as few as 9 cells could induce an 
additional digit 2 (Tickle, 1981). Induction of an additional digit 4 requires 
approximately twice the number of polarizing cells needed to induce a digit 
3, which requires approximately twice the number of cells needed for 
induction of digit 2. The observation that number of polarizing region cells is 
related to identity of the digits induced suggested that a quantitative 
relationship between a polarizing signal and specification of digits may 
control pattern in the limb (Tickle, 1981).
The distribution of polarizing activity in the wing was mapped by 
MacCabe et al. (1973) and by Honig and Summerbell (1985), who showed 
that the strength of the signal was not evenly distributed, but was highest in 
the posterior wing bud and decreased in a gradient extending proximally in 
the bud and posteriorly into the flank (MacCabe, Gasseling, and Saunders, 
1973); (Honig and Summerbell, 1985). Subsequent work on chick embryos 
at pre-limb stages showed that as early as stage 10, cells located at the 
posterior margin of the prospective wing, and flank cells posterior to the 
prospective wing level could induce duplications when transplanted to a 
host wing bud (Hornbruch and Wolpert, 1991). Prior to limb budding, the 
strongest polarizing potential is detected in posterior prospective limb and in 
anterior flank. Signaling activity decreases posteriorly along the flank such 
that flank cells just anterior to the prospective leg bud do not have polarizing 
activity. Although the same polarizing signal operates in forelimb and 
hindlimb development (Tickle at al., 1976), the distribution of polarizing 
potential is not continuous between the posterior wing and posterior leg. 
The polarizing region of the leg is derived from a separate population of cells 
extending from the posterior of the prospective leg into the anterior part of 
the tail bud (Hinchliffe and Sansom, 1985); (Hornbruch and Wolpert, 1991). 
The distribution of polarizing potential is refined during development, as
polarizing potential disappears from the flank and remains in the posterior 
wing and leg bud (Hornbruch and Wolpert, 1991). Hornbruch and Wolpert 
indicate that polarizing potential disappears from the flank shortly after limb 
buds have emerged from the body wall, although Yonei et a, have 
suggested that the stage at which polarizing activity is lost from the flank is 
considerably later (Yonei et ai, 1995). Other tissues have also been shown 
to have polarizing activity when grafted to the chick wing, such as the node, 
floor plate of the neural tube, notochord, gut and pharyngeal endoderm, 
genital tubercle, perichondrium, tail bud and tooth germ (Hornbruch and 
Wolpert, 1986, Wagner ef a/., 1990, DoWe et al., 1991, Izpisua-Belmonte et 
a/., 1992, Koyama et a/., 1996, Roberts et a/., 1995, Saunders and 
Gasseling, 1983) which suggests conservation of the signaling molecules 
involved in patterning other organ systems in the embryo.
Polarizing activity is not only shared by different organ systems, but 
has also been shown to be highly conserved among evolutionarily distant 
vertebrates. A polarizing region was identified in mammals by grafting 
posterior limb mesenchyme cells from embryonic mice (Tickle et a/., 1976), 
hamsters (MacCabe and Parker, 1976), pigs, ferrets and humans (Fallon 
and Crosby, 1977) to the anterior margin of a chick wing bud. Reptilian limb 
buds also contain a polarizing region. Posterior limb mesenchyme from the 
snapping turtle, painted turtle (Fallon and Crosby, 1977), map turtle, and 
alligator (Honig, 1984)can induce digit duplications when grafted to the 
anterior margin of a chick wing. As in birds, polarizing activity within the 
mammalian and reptilian limb bud appears to be restricted to the posterior, 
as grafts of anterior cells to the anterior margin of the chick limb have no 
effect on the pattern of the chick limb.
Figure 1. The Zone of Polarizing Activity (ZPA) patterns the 
anteroposterior axis of the limb.
A. Diagram of the chick wing bud (left) and mature wing skeleton (right). 
The zone of polarizing activity (ZPA), shown in red, is involved in patterning 
the limb across the anterior to posterior axis. In the mature wing (right), the 
most anterior digit is digit 2 and the most posterior digit is digit 4. B. 
Transplantation of an additional ZPA to the anterior margin of the wing bud 
(left) left results in mirror-image duplication along the anteroposterior axis, 
shown of the right. Asterisks next to numbers denote duplicated digits.
Anterior
Posterior ZPA
Normal chick limb
Anterior
Posterior
Transplanted
M irro r image duplication
2.1 Polarizing activity in urodele amphibians
The principles that govern limb development are shared by all 
amniotes, and most also apply to amphibians. Much of the early 
experimental work on vertebrate limb development was done in the 1910's- 
1920's on urodele amphibians. Harrison identified in the axolotl embryo an 
area of lateral plate mesoderm cells ventral to the pronephros that was 
capable of forming a complete limb when transplanted in whole or in part to 
ectopic positions, and he referred to this as the limb disc (reviewed in 
Harrison, 1969). In a series of transplantation experiments designed to 
investigate when limb axes were determined, Harrison uncovered what was 
later interpreted by Slack to be polarizing activity (Slack, 1976, Slack, 
1977a, Slack, 1977b). In these experiments, the limb disc (or presumptive 
limb) was excised from an embryonic axolotl and transplanted in different 
orientations either to the flank (heterotopic grafts) or back to the limb 
(orthotopic grafts) (Harrison, 1969, Slack, 1977a, Stocum and Fallon, 1984). 
Development of the grafted limb with normal polarity was taken as an 
indication that the axis had been determined prior to transplantation, 
whereas development of limbs with reversed polarity indicated that the axis 
had not yet been determined (reviewed in Stocum and Fallon, 1984). 
Orthotopic grafts of limb discs with the a-p axis inverted resulted in formation 
of limbs with their original polarity (accompanied by duplicated limbs on the 
anterior and posterior sides). When these same experiments were 
performed with the graft placed heterotopically in the flank, curious 
differences were observed. Limb discs placed in the flank with their a-p 
polarity unchanged resulted in formation of limbs with mirror image 
duplications in the a-p axis. When the a-p polarity of the graft was reversed, 
however, very few limbs developed duplicated patterns. Subsequent work 
by Slack (1976,1977a, b) offered an explanation for these results by 
demonstrating the importance of peribrachial flank cells. Slack showed that
flank cells posterior to the limb disc have polarizing activity similar to that 
identified in the chick embryo (see above). Transplantation of flank tissue to 
the anterior margin of the limb disc induced mirror-image duplication of the 
digits (Slack, 1976). Interspecific grafts demonstrated that the duplicated 
digits were not derived from the graft, but had been induced in the host 
tissue. In urodeles, as described above for the chick, the distribution of cells 
with polarizing activity extends into the flank, well beyond the posterior limit 
of tissue competent to form a limb (Slack, 1976, 1977a). Thus, Harrison's 
transplantation of a forelimb disc into the flank positioned the anterior edge 
of the limb disc adjacent to flank cells with polarizing activity. If the posterior 
peribrachial flank cells were included in the graft, which they were in 
Harrison's experiments, then the limb disc developed with polarizing cells at 
the anterior and posterior margins. This also explained how anterior 
fragments of limb disc could "regulate" and give rise to a limb when 
transplanted to the flank -  the polarizing signal would have been supplied 
by the adjacent flank cells. Similarly, transplantation of the anterior half of 
the limb disc to the head would give rise to a limb only when posterior flank 
tissue was grafted alongside it (Slack 1977a). The ventral half of the limb 
disc is also unable to develop unless accompanied by the dorsal half (Slack, 
1980). Ventral disc tissue transplanted to the flank showed no growth at all, 
suggesting that the dorsal part of the disc (which includes the pronephros) 
contained either a permissive or stimulatory factor required for limb 
development, which may also be involved in dorsoventral patterning (Slack, 
1980).
Slack suggested that the limb rudiment consists of a homogeneous 
population of cells that responds to graded signals, as described for the 
chick limb (Tickle et al., 1975) rather than a group of polarized cells, as 
Harrison had argued (Slack, 1977b; Harrison 1969) . The observation that
anterior cells grafted to the head do not give rise to a limb suggests that the 
polarizing signal is not only involved in patterning the limb, but also must be 
involved in limb outgrowth. These experiments focused on the 
establishment of pattern and polarity within the limb. They indicate that the 
distribution of polarizing signal determines the pattern of skeletal elements 
within the limb.
2.2 Molecular basis of polarizing activity
2.2.1 Retinoic acid
Considerable progress towards identifying the molecular networks 
involved in limb patterning has been made within the past 15 years. Retinoic 
acid was the first defined molecule implicated in limb patterning. Tickle et al. 
showed that application of aW-trans retinoic acid to the chick wing could 
mimic the effect of a polarizing region graft, which suggested that retinoic 
acid may mediate the activity of the polarizing region (Tickle at a/., 1982). 
Moreover, like the polarizing region graft, retinoic acid acts in a 
concentration-dependent manner when applied to the limb, with higher 
doses specifying more posterior digits (Tickle, Lee, and Eichele, 1985). An 
interesting distinction between grafts of polarizing region and retinoic acid 
beads to the anterior limb is that a polarizing region graft does not induce 
another polarizing region (Smith, 1979) whereas retinoic acid can induce a 
new polarizing region and RARp expression in adjacent cells (Noji at a.,
1991). Retinoic acid can also convert anterior limb bud mesenchyme cells to 
polarizing cells in vitro (Hayamizu and Bryant, 1992). During normal 
development, retinoic acid may act upstream of the polarizing signal by 
inducing a polarizing region that, in turn, signals to cells in the limb. In the 
chick limb bud, aW-trans - and didehydroretinoic acid levels are highest 
posteriorly (Scott at ai., 1994, Stratford, Horton, and Maden, 1996, Thaller
and Eichele, 1987). Retinoic acid receptors and binding proteins are also 
expressed in the limb, indicating that the cellular machinery that would be 
required for endogenous retinoid activity is present in the limb. Maden et ai. 
showed that cellular retinoic acid binding protein is present in a gradient 
opposite to that of retinoic acid (i.e., highest anteriorly), and Doll et a/, 
found that retinoic acid receptor (RAR) p is expressed proximally and RARa 
and Y are expressed throughout the limb buds of 10 day mouse embryos 
(Dolle et al., 1989, Maden et a., 1988). Loss of function mutations in the 
retinoic acid receptors and binding proteins individually result in 
development of surprisingly normal limbs, although compound mutants 
develop limb defects (Fawcett et a., 1995; Lohnes et al., 1993; Lohnes et 
a., 1994) These results suggest that endogenous retinoids are involved in 
limb development, and that functional redundancy in the retinoid receptor 
machinery allows for single and even compound loss of function mutations 
without severe pattern alterations (Lohnes et a., 1994).
2.2.2 Sonic hedgehog
Recently, transcripts of a vertebrate homolog of the Drosophila 
hedgehog gene. Sonic hedgehog {Shh), have been found to map to the 
polarizing region, and grafts of Sf?/?-expressing cells, or application of SHH 
protein to the anterior limb bud induce digit duplications (Lopez-Martinez et 
al., 1995, Riddle et al., 1993, Yang and Drossopoulou et al., 1997). 
Polarizing activity is found in other regions of the embryo, such as Hensen's 
node (Hornbruch and Wolpert, 1986) and the floor plate of the neural tube 
(Wagner et al., 1990), and these tissues also express Sonic hedgehog 
(Riddle et al., 1993). Flank cells with polarizing potential do not express 
Shh, but can induce digit duplications and activate Shh when grafted to the 
anterior margin of a host wing bud (Hornbruch and Wolpert, 1991, Yonei et 
al., 1995). Loss of function mutations in Shh result in severe limb truncations
at the level of the femur/humerus (Chiang et al., 1996). This is consistent 
with the role of Shh in maintaining limb outgrowth as well as patterning (see 
below).
Two forms of SHH protein are secreted from the cell as a 
consequence of autoproteolytic processing (Bumcrot, Takada, and 
McMahon, 1995). The N-terminal peptide has been shown to possess all of 
the signaling activity in biological assays (Marti eta., 1995a). More recent 
work has shown that a component of Shh (and hh in Drosophila) 
autoprocessing is attachment of cholesterol to the N-terminal peptide (Porter, 
Young, and Beachy, 1996). Attachment of the lipophilic cholesterol allows 
the peptide to associate tightly with the surface of the cell. Tethering the 
active peptide to the cell surface allows a highly local concentration of SHH 
to be maintained on the surface of the SHH-producing cells 
(Hammerschmidt, Brook, and McMahon, 1997). Shh is involved in long- 
range and short-range patterning during development (Johnson and Tabin,
1995). If SHH acts as a long-range signal in limb patterning, then it should 
be distributed in a gradient across the limb bud and signalling should be 
dose dependent. Surprisingly, the distribution of SHH-N peptide in the limb 
maps precisely to the domain of mRNA, and protein could not be detected at 
a distance from the polarizing region (Lopez-Martinez at al., 1995, Marti at 
al., 1995b). However, Yang and Drossopoulou at al. (1997) have found that 
high concentrations of SHH applied anteriorly in the wing bud induce 
posterior digits whereas lower concentrations of SHH induce anterior digits. 
This dose-dependent response of limb cells to SHH signaling suggests that 
cells could respond to a gradient of SHH. Failure to detect a gradient of 
SHH protein in the limb could be a problem with the sensitivity of the 
antibodies being inadequate to detect low levels of protein. Another 
possibility is that SHH acts indirectly by short-range induction of a secondary 
signal that acts over a long-range (see below).
Recent work on the SHH transduction pathway, and on the molecular 
response of limb cells to treatment with candidate signaling molecules, 
means that the polarizing pathway in the limb is starting to become clear. 
Retinoic acid induces Shh expression (Riddle et al., 1993), and it has been 
shown that retinoid synthesis is required for normal expression of Shh (Lu et 
al., 1997, Stratford, Kostakopoulou, and Maden, 1997). It now appears that 
activation of Shh by retinoic acid is mediated by the HoxbS gene (discussed 
below). Ptc , a transmembrane protein that is the SHH receptor (Marigo et 
al., 1996a), is expressed in the posterior mesenchyme of the limb bud in a 
domain that extends beyond the Shh domain (Marigo et al., 1996b). PTC 
represses its own transcription. When SHH binds PTC, it represses PTC 
activity, which in turn allows Ptc to be transcribed. Marigo et al. have 
therefore proposed that Ptc expression indicates that cells have been 
exposed to SHH (Marigo et al., 1996b). Expression of cubitus interruptus, a 
zinc finger gene in Drosophila homologous to the vertebrate Gli gene, is 
necessary for expression of ptc. In vertebrates, Shh induces Gli expression 
in the limb, and transcriptionally activated form of Gli can induce Ptc  
expression (Marigo et al., 1996b). The SHH signaling pathway is negatively 
regulated by protein kinase A (PKA), and blocking PKA activity by 
overexpression of a dominant negative form of PKA simulates the effect of 
ectopic Shh expression by activation of Shh targets Ptc and Gli (Epstein et 
al., 1996).
SHH activates expression of the signaling molecule Bmp2 in limb bud 
mesenchyme, and BMP2 could mediate the effects of SHH (Laufer et al., 
1994, Yang and Drossopoulou et al., 1997). This appears to be a widely 
used pathway in vertebrates (Bitgood and McMahon, 1995). Also, in 
Drosophila, decapentaplegic, the homologue of Bmp2, is activated as a 
result of hedgehog signaling in the wing imaginai disc (Basler and Struhl,
1994). Bmp2 transcripts map to the polarizing region (Francis et al., 1994). 
Grafts of Bmp2-expressing cells to the anterior wing bud can induce an 
additional digit 2 (Duprez et a., 1996), but anterior application of BMP2 
protein does not lead to digit duplications (Francis et a., 1994). The inability 
of BMP2 to induce complete digit duplications suggests that it does not act to 
relay the Shh signal. Bmp2, Bmp4 and Bmp7 are expressed in the 
mesenchyme and the apical ridge and could therefore participate in 
signaling between the mesenchyme and the ridge (Francis-West et a.,
1995). In Drosophila, however, dpp signaling is not required for hh to exert 
its effect during eye development, but this independence may be limited to 
short-range interactions (Burke and Basler, 1996).
2.2.3 Hox genes in limbs
Hox genes are transcription factors containing a homebox, a 180 
base pair highly conserved domain that encodes a helix-turn-helix protein 
(Krumlauf, 1992). Hox genes are involved in the specification of positional 
identity during metazoan embryogenesis. Gain or loss of function mutations 
involving Hox genes can produce dramatic transformations in which one 
body part or segment is substituted for another (homeotic mutations). These 
mutations were first identified in Drosophila, where genetic analyses led to 
the proposal that they operate as selector genes, determining where 
particular structures develop (Lewis, 1978). In Drosophila, all Antennapedia 
and Bithorax-c\ass Hox genes (defined by shared identity in the 
homeodomain) are located on chromosome 3 in a complex collectively 
referred to as the Homeotic complex (Krumlauf, 1992). Vertebrate 
homologues of the Hox genes were first identified in the frog (De Robertis, 
1994), and are characterized by: (a) sequence similarity to the Drosophila
Hox complex, (b) organization in gene clusters and (c) correspondence
between expression pattern along the embryonic axis.^rangement on the
chromosome (Kappen, 1996). In all animals so far examined, genes located 
at the 3' end of the Hox cluster are expressed at the anterior end of the 
animal and genes located at the 5' end are expressed posteriorly. Duboule 
and colleagues proposed the rule of spatial colinearity to describe this 
correspondence between Hox gene position in the cluster and expression 
pattern in the embryo (reviewed in Duboule and Morata, 1994). Position 
within the cluster also correlates with temporal sequence of expression , so 
that 3' genes are expressed before their 5' neighbors (termed "temporal 
colinearity"). This results in an embryonic expression pattern in which 3' Hox 
genes are activated anteriorly, prior to expression of more 5' genes in more 
posterior body regions.
Hox gene expression in tetrapod limbs has been the focus of 
considerable attention. Most work has centered on /\bdf-related members 
of the Hoxa and Hoxd clusters, but it is now clear that members of all four 
clusters are activated during bud outgrowth (Nelson et ai, 1996). Genes 
situated 5 in the Hoxa and Hoxd clusters form a series of overlapping 
domains centered on distal and posterior-distal regions, respectively, of the 
early limb bud (Izpisua-Belmonte and Duboule, 1992). The same Hoxa and 
Hoxd genes are expressed in the fore and hindlimb buds (Nelson at ai,
1996) and can be activated by retinoic acid, SHH, and BMP2 in the 
presence of FGF (Duprez at ai, 1996, Izpisua-Belmonte at ai, 1991, Riddle 
at ai, 1993)
Overexpression of Hoxd11 produces local pattern alterations, and an 
anterior digit in the chick leg appears to be posteriorized (Morgan at ai,
1992). The idea that the sole function of Hox gana expression domains is to 
encode position (Tabin, 1992) appears be an oversimplification, and after a 
recent reinterpretation of the above result, the authors conclude that the 
effect of overexpression is an altered growth program (Morgan and Tabin,
1994). Duboule has argued that the pattern of cell proliferation and growth 
is controlled by much earlier expression of Hox genes, and thus, may be the 
mechanism by which homeosis is achieved (Duboule, 1995). 
Mesenchyme cells in different regions of the limb bud express different 
combinations of Hox genes. Patterns of Hox gene expression are dynamic 
and do not remain fixed. Early expression patterns are associated with 
patterning of the stylopod and zeugopod, and this expression period can be 
subdivided into corresponding proximal and more distal phases (Nelson et 
a/., 1996). A third, distalmost expression phase maps onto the domain of 
digit development where gene expression extends anteroposteriorly across 
the bud apex (Izpisua-Belmonte and Duboule, 1992, Vargesson at a/., 
1997). Functional inactivation of Hoxa 13 results in loss of digit 1 and 
malformation of the carpals and tarsals (Fromental- Ramain at a i, 1996). 
When Hoxd 13 is functionally inactivated, digit development is delayed and 
there are only small changes in digit morphology (Dolle at ai, 1993) It is 
possible that, although not functionally equivalent, Hoxa13 could partially 
compensate for the lack of Hoxd13. Consistent with this idea, digits are 
almost completely absent in Hoxd13/Hoxa13 double mutants (Fromental- 
Ramain at ai, 1996). Similarly, in double homozygous mutants for H o xa ll 
and H oxd ll (which are expressed more proximally and anteriorly than the 
Hoxa13 and Hoxd13 genes), the forearm is almost completely absent (Davis 
at ai, 1995).
Unlike these Hoxa and Hoxd genes, the Hoxc gene contribution to the 
wing is not restricted so closely to the 5' end of the cluster, and the 
expression domains lie within the anterior proximal region of each bud. 
Fore- and hindlimb buds express different Hoxc genes, and these respect 
the colinear expression sequence along the body axis. Hoxc6 is also 
retinoid responsive, and is down regulated by retinoic acid application (Oliver 
at ai, 1990). Hoxc6 is associated with development of the shoulder girdle.
Of the Hoxb cluster, Hoxb5, Hoxb8, and Hoxb9 are expressed during 
limb development (Nelson et al., 1996). Two of the Hoxb genes Hoxb5 and 
Hoxbd, have been linked to the relationship of limbs to patterning along the 
body axis. A loss of function mutation in the mouse Hoxbd gene causes an 
apparent shift in the position of the forelimb relative to the axial skeleton 
(Rancourt, Tsuzuki, and Capecchi, 1995). Hoxbd is normally expressed in 
the region of the shoulder (Wall at a., 1992). It is unclear whether the 
forelimb bud in mutant mice emerges from cells at a more anterior position, 
or whether the shifted limb is due to a malformation in the shoulder that 
results in a "shrugged" anterior orientation of the girdle. The girdle appears 
to originate at the normal axial level, but is longer and projects anteriorly 
rather than laterally. The shifted limb is innervated by the normal brachial 
plexus and the axon trajectories are normal within the limb, although the 
nerves enter the limb at a more posterior position (Rancourt at a i, 1995). 
These results suggest that the forelimb may not originate from a more 
anterior position, but may be secondarily shifted instead.
Hoxbd has been implicated in positioning the polarizing region. 
Hoxbd is normally expressed in lateral plate mesoderm of the anterior 
hindlimb and flank, with an anterior boundary in the posterior region of the 
forelimb (Charit at ai, 1994, Lu at ai, 1997, Stratford, Kostakopoulou, and 
Maden, 1997). In a transgenic mouse designed to push Hoxbd gene 
expression to a more anterior level, the Hoxbd gene was driven by the 
RARp2 promoter (Charit at ai, 1994). The resulting expression of Hoxbd 
throughout the forelimb resulted in formation of an ectopic polarizing region, 
and as a consequence, a mirror image duplication in the forelimbs (Charit 
at ai, 1994). This result suggested that the anterior boundary of expression 
may position the polarizing region in the forelimb. Consistent with this idea.
the hindlimbs of the mutants are normal. A more posterior (5') Hox gene is 
presumably involved in positioning the polarizing region in the hindlimb. 
Stratford et al. have recently shown that Hoxbd expression in the chick is 
tightly correlated with the distribution of polarizing potential in the lateral 
plate mesoderm of the chick embryo (Stratford, Kostakopoulou, and Maden,
1997). There now appears to be a direct link between retinoic acid and 
Hoxbd in induction of the polarizing region, as retinoid treatment can induce 
Hoxbd expression in the limb within 30 minutes and in the absence of 
protein synthesis (Lu et al., 1997; Stratford et al., 1997). Early expression of 
Hox genes along the embryonic axis may also^regulated by retinoids 
(Conlon, 1995), which can interact directly with retinoic acid response 
elements within enhancers that direct restricted expression (Morrison et al.,
1996). Hox gene expression along the body axis plays a direct role in limb 
development by determining where, within the limb, the polarizing region is 
situated. The possibility that Hox genes are involved in specifying limb 
position is also attractive, and work reported in chapter 4 of this thesis 
suggests that this is indeed the case.
3. Proximodistal outgrowth and patterning
3.1 The apical ectodermal ridge
Outgrowth of the limb bud along the proximodistal (shoulder to digits) 
axis is controlled by the apical ectodermal ridge. The apical ectodermal 
ridge (AER) is a pseudo-stratified columnar epithelium that rims the 
developing limb bud. Surgical removal of the ridge (Saunders, 1948) results 
in truncation of the limb in a stage-dependent manner; earlier ridge removals 
result in more severe truncations (Fig. 2) (Summerbell, 1974). Grafting an 
additional ridge onto the dorsal surface of the limb bud causes a new axis of 
outgrowth (Zwilling, 1956a). Mutants which have perturbed apical ridge 
formation exhibit the predicted morphological effects in the limb, such as the
Eudiplopoidia mutant, which develops an ectopic apical ridge on the surface 
of the limb and consequentially, ectopic limb structures develop. Limbless 
and wingless embryos fail to form a normal apical ridge and as the names 
imply, they lack both wings and legs, and wings alone, respectively (Fallon 
et ai, 1983, Zwilling, 1956b).
Figure 2. The Apical Ectodermal Ridge (AER) maintains 
proximodistal outgrowth of the limb.
A. The chick wing bud is rimmed by the apical ectodermal ridge (left, in 
blue) which maintains proximodistal outgrowth of the limb. The mature wing 
skeleton is organized along a proximal to distal (proximodistal) axis, with the 
scapula and coracoid being the most proximal structures and the digits 
being the most distal. B. Removal of the apical ectodermal ridge from the 
limb bud (left) results in loss of distal structures in the mature limb (right).
Proximal
Distal
AER removed
Normal chick limb 
ScapulaJia
 H u m e ru s
'    R ad ius >
1 TinaUlna  
Proximal
Truncated limb
Scapula Curacwiit
Humerus
4 ' 
Distal
3.2 Molecular basis of ridge signaling
3.2.1 Fibroblast growth factors
There is increasing evidence that signaling by the AER is mediated by 
fibroblast growth factors (FGFs). The FGF family of signaling molecules 
consists of at least 10 members. The size of the protein is variable among 
the different members, ranging from 155 to 267 amino acids, but all are 
characterized by the presence of a conserved region of approximately 125 
amino acids (Thomas, 1993). Although only 7  members contain 
recognizable secretory signal sequences (Abraham et al., 1986, Thomas,
1993), alternate mechanisms have been proposed to account for release of 
FGF1 and FGF2 from the cell. In several systems, studies have shown that 
FGF2 is not released from the cell unless cell death or damage occurs 
(reviewed in Thomas, 1993). McNeil has proposed that transient, non-lethal 
wounding of the plasma membrane may be a mechanism of bFGF release 
(McNeil, 1993), and Mignatti and Rifkin have suggested that exocytosis may 
be a means by which bFGF could escape from the cell (Mignatti and Rifkin,
1991).
FgfS is expressed throughout the ridge from very early in limb 
development, while transcripts of Fgf4 are detected later and are posteriorly 
restricted in the ridge. FGF2 protein can be detected at high levels in the 
ridge and ectoderm and at lower levels in limb mesoderm. Experimental 
work has shown that the apical ectodermal ridge signal can be replaced by 
application of FGF8 (Crossley et al., 1996, Vogel, Rodriguez, and Izpisua- 
Belmonte, 1996), FGF4 (Niswander et a., 1993) or FGF2 (Fallon et a.,
1994). The posterior ridge, or FGF4, also maintains signaling activity in the 
polarizing region (Vogel and Tickle, 1993). A positive feedback loop, 
coordinating limb outgrowth and patterning, involves reciprocal maintenance 
between Shh in the ZPA, and Fgf4 in the AER (Laufer et a/., 1994,
Niswander et al., 1994). The polarizing region signal, in conjunction with 
FGF4, may establish the progress zone at the tip of the bud and allow 
continued patterning of limb structures (Niswander at a., 1993).
FGF binds to a group of 4 receptor tyrosine kinases (FGF receptor 
[FGFR] 1-4) with varying affinity (Green, Walsh, and Doherty, 1996, Ornitz at 
al., 1996). Different isoforms of FGFR1-4 can be generated by alternative 
splicing, which can alter the ligand binding properties of the receptor(Green, 
Walsh, and Doherty, 1996). Several FGF receptors are expressed in the 
emerging limb buds, although expression patterns of the different isoforms 
are, for the most part, not yet known (see below). In the mouse embryo, 
FGFR1 is expressed in mesenchymal cells and FGFR2 is expressed in the 
overlying ectoderm, including the AER (Orr-Urtreger at al., 1991, Peters at 
al., 1992). Both receptors can bind FGF1- FGF6, but not FGF7 (Johnson at 
al., 1990, Mansukhani atal., 1990, Miki atal., 1992, Orr-Urtreger ef a/., 1993, 
Werner at al., 1992). FGF7 is the ligand for KG F Receptor (KGFR), a splicing 
variant of FGFR-2 encoded by the bak gene (Miki at al., 1992), which is 
expressed only in the ectoderm (Orr-Urtreger at al., 1993). Although FGF8 
is expressed in the ridge, it seems to show the strongest affinity for FGFR4 (a 
relative of the chicken FREK gene) (Marcelle at al., 1994) which is expressed 
in muscle cells of the limb. The affinity of FGFs for their receptors is 
increased by heparin and heparan sulphate proteoglycans (Green, Walsh, 
and Doherty, 1996, Yayon atal., 1991). Syndacani, a member of the 
Syndecan family of heparan sulphate proteoglycan family, is expressed in 
limb bud mesenchyme in a similar pattern to FGFR1 (Bernfield, Hinkes, and 
Gallo, 1993). The Syndacani promoter contains binding sites for 
homeoproteins, suggesting that expression of both Syndecans and FGFs 
(see below) may be regulated by Hox gene expression during development 
(Bernfield, Hinkes, and Gallo, 1993).
3.3 The progress zone
The proximo-distal pattern of the limb elements is determined in the 
mesenchyme at the tip of the limb bud, known as the progress zone. Cells in 
the progress zone at the distal tip of the bud are kept in a rapidly proliferating 
undifferentiated state by the overlying ridge (Summerbell, Lewis, and 
Wolpert, 1973). Summerbell et al. proposed that the p-d identity of limb bud 
mesenchyme cells is determined by the length of time they spend dividing in 
the progress zone, either by a mitotic clock or other mechanisms involving 
exposure to a local factor (such that exit from the progress zone equates with 
a positional stamp indicating when this cell left the influence of the zone). 
The cell then interprets this information, or value, as a positional address 
along the p-d axis. As the cell number increases in the progress zone, cells 
furthest from the ridge exit the zone and are left behind (proximally) in the 
limb. According to the model, the first cells to exit this region are specified to 
give rise to the most proximal structures.
3.4 Candidate molecules expressed in the progress zone
Msx1 and Msx2, two related homeobox genes, are expressed in the 
progress zone, and Msx1 can be maintained by FGF (Vogel, Roberts, and 
Niswander, 1995). Msx2 is expressed in the apical ridge and anteriorly in 
the progress zone (Coelho et a/., 1991, Davidson et a/., 1991). Cek8, a 
receptor tyrosine kinase, is also expressed in the progress zone, and, like 
Msx1, expression of Cek6 is dependent upon FGF signals from the apical 
ridge (Patel et a/., 1996). Msx and Cek8 genes may be involved in 
integrating and interpreting apical ridge signals. Wnt5a, a short-range 
signaling molecule closely related to the Drosophila Dwnt5  gene 
(Eisenberg, Ingham, and Brown, 1992), is also expressed in the limb with 
highest levels in the progress zone and the apical ridge (Dealy et al., 1993,
Parr et al., 1993). This is particularly interesting because Dwnt5 is thought to 
be a downstream target of Distal-less (D//)(Eisenberg, Ingham, and Brown,
1992), and several vertebrate homologues of Dll (Dix) are expressed in the 
apical ridge overlying the progress zone (Bulfone et al., 1993, Dolle, Price, 
and Duboule, 1992, Ferrari et al., 1995). Wnt12 is also expressed in the 
apical ridge (Christiansen et al., 1995). Based on homology to Drosophila 
signaling networks, an interesting possibility is that in the apical ridge DLX 
induces expression of Wnt5a (and possibly other Writs) which could, in turn, 
induce Bmp expression. (If the ability of dll to induce dpp in Drosophila has 
been conserved in vertebrates, then DLX may directly induce Bm p  
expression.) Wnt genes cooperate with FGF to induce mesoderm in 
Xenopus (Christian, Olson, and Moon, 1992). Moreover, mouse mammary 
tumor virus (MMTV) has been found to activate transcription of Wnt1, Wnt3, 
Fgf3 and Fgf4 in mouse mammary tumors, and an attractive possibility is that 
these factors cooperate in carcinogenesis and development (reviewed in 
Nusse and Varmus, 1992). It will be interesting, therefore, to determine 
whether Wnt genes are involved in induction of Fgf in the apical ridge, and 
whether Wnt gene expression in the underlying progress zone (i.e., Wnt5a) 
is dependent on FGF signaling.
4. Dosoventral polarity
Dorsoventral polarity (d-v) of the limb bud is initially established in the 
lateral plate mesoderm, and this information is subsequently transferred to 
the ectoderm, where it feeds back on the mesoderm (Geduspan and 
MacCabe, 1989, MacCabe, Errick, and Saunders, 1974, Saunders and 
Reuss, 1974). The latter interaction results in the establishment of polarized 
gene expression within the limb bud mesenchyme. A signal secreted by the 
dorsal ectoderm, WNT7a, contributes to limb patterning along the dorso
ventral axis (Parr and McMahon, 1995) by inducing expression of Lmx1, a
transcription factor in the dorsal mesenchyme (Riddle et al., 1995, Vogel at 
a., 1995). Shh expression is also maintained by Wnt7a (Yang and 
Niswander, 1995). Expression of engrailed1(en1), a homeobox gene, in the 
ventral ectoderm antagonizes WntJa expression, and thereby inhibits 
formation of dorsal structures on the ventral surface (Logan at a/., 1997, 
Loomis at al., 1996). Involvement of Wnt7a and an1 in dorsoventral 
patterning is supported by the phenotypes of the WntJa and an1 knockout 
mice, which develop with a double ventral and a double dorsal pattern, 
respectively, in the limbs (Parr and McMahon, 1995; Loomis at al., 1996).
LMX1 is a relative of the
Drosophila LIM domain gene apterous, and, like Wnt7a in the 
ectoderm, expression of this gene is activated very early in lateral plate 
mesoderm, even before a limb bud is formed (Riddle at al., 1995, Vogel at 
al., 1995). It is striking that apterous is also expressed in the dorsal 
compartment of the Drosophila wing disc (Blair, 1995). Infection of chick 
wing bud ectoderm with a retrovirus containing Wnt7a results in ectopic 
activation of LMX1 in ventral mesoderm, and when presumptive limb is 
infected with a retrovirus containing LMX1, parts of the ventral limb are 
dorsalized (Riddle at al., 1995, Vogel at al., 1995).
The link between dorsoventral patterning and apical ridge formation 
has been emphasized in several recent studies on the chick limbless mutant. 
In three independent studies, the limbless mutation was shown to qffect 
dorsoventral polarity of the limb bud. The entire limb is dorsalized and 
expresses Wnt7a and Lmx1 throughout. In the absence of a d-v boundary, 
the apical ridge fails to form (Grieshammer at al., 1996, Noramly at al., 1996, 
Ros at al., 1996). Radical Fringe (R-fng) is normally expressed in the dorsal 
ectoderm of the emerging bud (Laufer at al., 1997, Rodriguez-Esteban at al.,
1997). The AER forms in the ectoderm at the boundary of R-fng expressing 
and non-expressing cells. En1 also represses R-fng ventrally, thereby 
creating the border of R-fng expression which positions the AER at the apex 
of the limb bud. However, in the absence of en1, an apical ridge is induced 
which expands into the ventral ectoderm(Loomis et al., 1996). This is 
surprising, because if en1 acts to repress R-fng, then R-fng expression 
should be found throughout the limb ectoderm. Thus, in the absence of 
apical expression boundaries, one would predict complete absence of an 
AER in en1 mutants. Although this is not the case in en1 mutants, this 
condition is seen in limbless mutants; R-fng is expressed throughout the limb 
ectoderm and the ridge fails to form (Laufer et al., 1997). The pattern of R- 
fng expression in en1 knockout mouse is not yet known, but the fact that the 
ridge is not completely deleted suggests that the role of R-fng in AER 
formation is likely to be more complicated than that initially proposed by 
Laufer et al. (1997) and Rodriguez-Esteban et al. (1997).
Two recent studies of dorsoventral polarity have shed new light on the 
developmental origin of the limb. Based on a series of chick-quail grafting 
experiments, Michaud et al. reported that the ectoderm overlying the medial 
(presumptive dorsal) somatic mesoderm gives rise to the apical ridge, the 
ectoderm overlying the somites and kidney gives rise to dorsal limb bud 
ectoderm, and the ectoderm of the lateral somatopleure makes-up the 
ventral half of the limb bud ectoderm (Michaud, Lapointe, and Le Douarin, 
1997). They argue that cells from each half oppose each other, but to not 
mix, at the apical ridge, Altabef et al. addressed the same problem using Oil 
labeling, and obtained different results (Altabef, Clarke, and Tickle, 1997). 
Altabef et al. found that the ectoderm over the medial somatopleure gave 
rise to dorsal limb bud ectoderm and apical ridge cells. They also found that 
ectoderm over the lateral somatopleure forms the ventral limb ectoderm and
apical ridge cells. However, in contrast to the sharp boundary seen by 
Michaud et al., Altabef at al. observed dorsal and ventral cells intermingling 
in the apical ridge, although ventral cells did not cross the ridge into the 
dorsal ectoderm nor did dorsal cells cross into ventral ectoderm. Both 
papers indicate that the limb ectoderm consists of two lineage-restricted 
compartments (dorsal and ventral), although the results conflict over the 
question of whether or not cells mix in the apical ridge boundary. Michaud at 
al. also demonstrate that the somites are a source of a dorsalizing factor and 
the lateral somatopleure is the source of a ventralizing factor, and although 
their model does not indicate a molecular basis for this induction, it does 
indicate that local environmental cues establish the initial dorsoventral 
polarity in the limb. Identification of these signals will be important for 
understanding how dorsoventral position of limb buds is established with 
respect to the main body axis.
5. Evolutionary conservation of signaling networks
Limb outgrowth is linked to interconnected genetic networks which 
pattern all three primary axes. The same genetic networks are deployed 
during development of many different organ systems within the embryo. In 
vertebrates, for example, there are common components in the molecular 
networks of limb, gut, lung, face, central nervous system, hair and feather, 
tooth, mammary gland and eye (Bitgood and McMahon, 1995, Dudley, 
Lyons, and Robertson, 1995, Hebert at al., 1994, Liem atal., 1995, Luo at al., 
1995, Nohno at al., 1995, Peters at al., 1994, Roberts at al., 1995, Thesleff, 
Vaahtokari, and Partanen, 1995, Wall and Hogan, 1995). Moreover, these 
networks appear to be evolutionarily conserved because they are used by 
Crustacea, insects and vertebrates during embryonic development (reviewed 
in Shubin, Tabin, and Carroll, 1997).
Several parallels have been identified between gene expression 
patterns in^tetrapods and teleosts (the major subgroup of ray-finned fishes), 
and functional comparisons of gene regulation are now possible. Sonic 
hedgehog is expressed at the posterior margin of zebrafish fin bud 
mesoderm(Sordino, van der Hoeven, and Duboule, 1995) and, as in 
tetrapods, treatment with retinoic acid induces ectopic Shh expression in the 
anterior part of the fin bud (Akimenko and Ekker, 1995) Several zebrafish 
FGF receptors have been identified, and at least one is expressed in the 
mesoderm underlying the fin bud apical ridge (Thisse, Thisse, and Weston,
1995). Engraiiedi is expressed in the ventral half of the pectoral fin bud 
ectoderm (Hatta et al., 1991). As in tetrapod limb buds, Msx genes are 
expressed in the mesenchyme and Msx and Dix genes are expressed in the 
apical ridge of teleost fins buds (Akimenko et al., 1995, Akimenko et al.,
1994). Significantly, in fins the ridge extends distally as an ectodermal fold, 
enclosing the developing dermal fin rays. Sordino and Duboule speculate 
that these rays may physically interrupt ectodermal signalling to the 
mesoderm, thereby truncating fin endoskeletal outgrowth (Sordino and 
Duboule, 1996). If this is correct, then a key question in the evolutionary 
transition from fins to limbs concerns the nature of the mechanism which 
evolved to prevent early fin-ray development, before such primitive bud- 
truncation occurs. Further analyses of zebrafish mutants and experimentally 
manipulated fin buds are likely to reveal additional differences and 
similarities between fin and limb development. Hox gene expression 
patterns in fin development are already beginning to uncover aspects of 
both.
Hox gene expression in zebrafish paired fins provides an informative 
comparison with tetrapod limbs. 5 Hoxa and Hoxd genes are expressed in 
pectoral and pelvic fins. Hoxb gene expression patterns in fin pairs are
currently undescribed, but Hoxc6 is expressed in a wedge-shaped domain 
at the anterior-proximal region of pectoral fin buds, similar to the pattern 
seen in tetrapod limbs (Molven et ai, 1990). Hox gene expression domains 
in zebrafish fin-pairs are abbreviated distally, however, and appear to be 
mono- or biphasic (Sordino, van der Hoeven, and Duboule, 1995) instead 
of triphasic as in limb buds (Nelson at ai 1996). These simpler expression 
patterns correlate impressively with shorter and simpler appendicular 
skeletons of zebrafish fins, relative to their tetrapod homologues.
6. Patterning the primary body axis
6.1 Hox genes
Members of the Hoxa, Hoxb, Hoxc, and Hoxd clusters interact to 
encode positional identity in vertebrate embryos. It now appears that this 
involves a complex program of cell behavior involving cell proliferation and 
adhesion, factors that are pivotal to the developmentally later event of growth 
(Dolle at ai, 1993, Duboule, 1995, Yokouchi at ai, 1995). Evolution of the 
Hox genes themselves may have played an important role in the elaboration 
of the vertebrate body plan. The evolutionary diversity of chordate Hox gene 
clusters is becoming increasingly clear (Fig. 3). Amphioxus, a 
cephalochordate, has only a single cluster, but this has members of at least 
10 out of the 13 paralogue gene groups identified in the four clusters of 
jawed vertebrates (Holland and Garcia-Fernandez, 1996, Sharman and 
Holland, 1996). This suggests that during early vertebrate evolution a Hox 
gene cluster resembling that of amphioxus underwent four-fold duplication, 
at a locus or loci preceding the divergence of lamprey and jawed 
vertebrate lineages (Pendleton at ai, 1993, Sharman and Holland, 1996). 
Moreover, the amphioxus Hox gene complement must itself have arisen from 
lateral duplications of the genes in successively simpler, more primitive Hox 
clusters (Kappen, 1996). Thus, even within a single Hox cluster, gene
duplications have occurred, and these events have allowed changes to 
accumulate in orthologous genes without altering existing developmental 
processes. Indeed, these changes may have facilitated acquisition of new 
developmental roles. Clues about the pattern of these events derive from 
Hox gene sequence analyses which identify three interrelated sets: anterior- 
(1-3), medial- (4-8), and postsrior-groups (9-13) (Fig. 3) (Kappen, 1996).
Since these fundamental duplication events, instead of further 
expansion of the Hox gene network, jawed vertebrate cluster evolution 
seems to have been characterised by gene deletions. This much is 
apparent from direct comparison of amphioxus with mouse clusters (Fig. 3) 
(Holland and Garcia-Fernandez, 1996). Cluster structures in other, non
mammalian, vertebrates are less well documented, and information about 
the zebrafish {Danio rerio), a teleost, is only just becoming available (Prince 
at a/., 1997, van der Hoeven at a/., 1996). However, the recent report of Hox 
cluster organisation in the puff erf ish Fugu rubripas, an advanced teleost, 
shows major differences relative to mammalian clusters , indicating quite 
separate patterns of gene loss in tetrapod and teleost lineages (Aparicio at 
a/., 1997). Furthermore, absence of Hoxd12 in Fugu (Aparicio at a/., 1997) 
but presence in Danio (van der Hoeven at al., 1996), already points to 
variation within the teleost fishes (Fig. 3).
Figure 3. Hox gene cluster diversity and evolution
Tree shows evolutionary relationships of representative chordates in 
which complete Hox cluster organization is known. Numbers indicate 
paralogous Hox gene groups and letters indicate Hox gene clusters. Mouse 
Hox genes from Sharman and Holland (Sharman and Holland, 1996), 
Hoxb Y 3 from Zeltser ef a/. (Zeltser, Desplan, and Heintz, 1996), puff erf ish 
Hox genes from Aparicio et al. (Aparicio at a., 1997) and Amphioxus Hox 
organization from Garcia-Fernandez and Holland (Garcia-Fernandez and 
Holland, 1994). Minimum inferred complexity of arthropod-chordate 
ancestral Hox gene cluster, and interrelationships of anterior (blue) medial 
(green) and posterior (red) Hox gene groups from Kappen ((Kappen, 1996)). 
Inter-gene distances are not indicated with the exception of Hoxb13, which is 
out of register with the other group 13 genes (Zeltser, Desplan, and Heintz,
1996). Open boxes in Amphioxus cluster indicate incompletely characterized 
genes (Sharman and Holland, 1996), and dotted boxes in pufferfish cluster 
indicate possible pseudogene remnants of Hoxd  and Hoxc3 (Aparicio at al.,
1997).
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
- * * - H  Q
a-D -
- O  Mouse
-a  m-a-o-o (mus)
-c     - - a - o o  
 M m  Q -
Pufferfish
(Fugu)
Amphioxus
(Branchiostoma)
-& Minimum inferred 
complexity
6.2. Hox genes and axial patterning.
During vertebrate development, the head-tail body axis is established 
during gastrulation, when cells are assigned anteroposterior positional 
identities (Beddington and Smith, 1993). The paraxial mesoderm, which 
forms the vertebrae, musculature and dermis, is a useful model for studying 
axial patterning because segmented somites have particular identities, and 
changes in these can be detected in the vertebral pattern. Kessel and Gruss 
showed that retinoid treatment could alter Hox gene expression boundaries 
along the A-P axis of paraxial mesoderm (Kessel and Gruss, 1991). These 
alterations result in apparent homeotic transformations of vertebral identity. 
Further evidence for the role of Hox genes in specifying vertebral identity 
comes from experiments in which Hox genes are knocked-out or 
overexpressed (Krumlauf, 1994).
Evolutionary changes in regional identity within a series of vertebral 
segments, such as conversion of the first lumbar vertebra to a thoracic, is 
known as transposition (Goodrich, 1930). Initial comparative studies of axial 
Hox expression have already begun to relate 'transposed' (Goodrich, 1930) 
vertebral anatomical landmarks and regions to shifts in conserved 
expression boundaries (Burke et al., 1995, Gaunt, 1994). In tetrapods the 
anteroposteriorly staggered expression domains of Hox genes from the 
same paralogue group are probably evolutionarily derived. These spatial 
differences, or dispersal, probably appeared with the evolution of axial 
regional boundaries such as the lumbar-thoracic division and sacrum 
(Gaunt, 1994; Burke at al, 1995). This interpretation is based upon the 
premise that members of each paralogue group primitively shared 
coincident expression boundaries. A clear prediction of this hypothesis is 
that simpler colinear expression patterns should be found in experimental 
subjects with less highly regionalized equivalent domains of axial
organisation (e.g. the vertebral column of the zebrafish, Danio rerio. 
Preliminary results from such a study appear to support this hypothesis. 
Prince and Ho report that, in comparison with tetrapods, zebrafish Hox 
genes of paralogue groups 6 to 8 share significantly closer anterior 
expression boundaries in the paraxial mesoderm (Prince at a/., 1997). 
Because these paralogues probably derive from a single ancestral gene, 
they suggest that the ancestral expression pattern has been retained and the 
boundaries became dispersed in tetrapods with increased specialization of 
the axial skeleton
6.3 Retinoids, limbs and the body plan
The earliest link between retinoids and limb formation may be 
coupled to more global specification of positional identity along the body 
axis. This is demonstrated by the dramatic experiments of Rutledge at a., in 
which systemic administration of retinoic acid to morula-stage mouse 
embryos resulted in duplications of the lower body, including the limbs 
(Rutledge at a/., 1994). Ectopic limbs were almost always induced posterior 
to the normal hindlimbs. Niederreither at al. repeated these experiments in 
a systematic study of the phenomenon, and classified the morphological 
effects into 4 groups; supernumerary limb buds (paired buds ventral and 
caudal to the normal hindlimbs), supernumerary axis (lower body axis with 
tail, limbs, and occasional genitalia) , unilateral twin (a single ectopic bud 
joined to the original bud along the a-p axis), and misshapen (normal buds 
with abnormal protrusions) (Niederreither at al., 1996). While the 
mechanisms by which this operates is unclear, it seems unlikely that retinoic 
acid acts on Hox genes in these experiments, because Hox gene expression 
is not known to be activated at morula stages. The authors suggest that 
retinoic acid may act to regulate secondary signaling molecules which act 
during or after gastrulation.
Retinoic acid has also been shown to transform regenerating tails into 
limbs (Maden, 1993, Mohanty-Hejmadi, Dutta, and Mahapatra, 1992, Muller, 
Streicher, and Muller, 1996). This dramatic effect of retinoic acid may be 
explained in light of recent work on the proximalizing effect of retinoic acid 
on the regenerating limb of the newt (Gardiner et al., 1995). The effect of 
retinoic acid on limb regeneration suggested some important differences 
between development and regeneration, the most obvious being that 
retinoids posteriorize the developing limb and proximalize the regenerating 
limb. Hox genes located at the 5' end of the complex are associated with 
posterior and distal positional values in the limb (Izpisua-Belmonte and 
Duboule, 1992). Accordingly, transformation of positional identity from 
anterior to posterior involves activation of these 5' genes. If proximalization 
of the blastema by retinoic acid is mediated by Hox genes, then the 
predicted effect of retinoic acid would be to downregulate 5' genes, leaving 
blastemal cells with a pattern of Hox gene expression characteristic of more 
a proximal position. Gardiner et ai. (1995) found that Hoxa13, which is re
expressed during limb regeneration, is indeed downregulated by retinoic 
acid treatment. If Hox genes are involved in the positional memory required 
for normal tail regeneration, then retinoic acid may act to reset the pattern of 
Hox gene expression from "tail" to "leg", which will almost certainly involve 
downregulation of group 13 Hox paralogues. If this is correct, then the tail to 
leg transformation may reflect loss of 5' Hox gene expression, which typically 
anteriorizes cells along the body axis. This interpretation is consistent with 
the idea that a particular combination of Hox genes could determine where 
limbs develop along the main body axis.
7. How are limbs induced?
The search for the origin of factors involved in limb induction has led
to the suggestion that medial tissues play a role in signaling to the lateral 
plate mesoderm. In the grafting experiments involving the limb disc of 
urodeles, the dorsal region of the peribrachial flank was found to be required 
for development of the limb (Slack, 1980, Stocum and Fallon, 1984). The 
dorsal region of the disc contains the pronephros, and several researchers 
have since argued on the basis of experimental evidence that the kidney 
plays an important role in limb development. Geduspan and Solursh found 
that ablation of the mesonephros in pre-limb bud stage chick embryos 
resulted in reduction or absence of the limb bud on the operated side 
(Geduspan and Solursh, 1992b). Chick-quail grafting experiments 
demonstrated that the medial part of the lateral plate mesoderm gives rise to 
the limb (Geduspan and Solursh, 1992a), and the proximity of this tissue to 
the mesonephros suggests that an inductive signal, whether it originated 
from or was transferred by the mesonephros, would not have to diffuse over 
a long range to affect prospective limb cells. Stephens and McNulty found 
that insertion of a foil barrier between the mesonephros and lateral plate 
mesoderm of the prospective wing between stages 12 and 15 inhibited wing 
development (Stephens and McNulty, 1981). Other work showed that 
paraxial mesoderm was necessary for limb initiation (Kieny, 1971), but this 
effect was early and transient, as removal of the somites at later stages had 
no effect on limb patterning, although the limbs lacked muscle (Chevallier, 
Kieny, and Mauger, 1978). Raynaud also suggested that paraxial 
mesoderm played a stimulatory role in reptilian limb induction, and reported 
that removal of the brachial somites from lizard embryos prevented limb 
development (Raynaud, 1977).
Limb determination is related to the prospective limb tissue moving 
past the node early in development. Rudnick showed that tissue 
transplanted from a level anterior to the node into the coelom of a host
embryo could differentiate into a limb, whereas tissue taken from posterior to 
the node did not (Rudnick, 1945). Chaube constructed a fate map of the 
early lateral plate mesoderm using chalk, and from this the relative 
movements of the prospective limbs and the node were determined 
(Chaube, 1959). Chaube found that the prospective wing cells pass the 
node between stages 8 and 9, which is precisely the same point at which 
these cells become competent to form a limb when transplanted to the 
coelom (Chaube, 1959). In a series of barrier experiments, Stephens et al. 
investigated the possibility that mediolateral progression of an inductive 
signal was involved in limb induction (Stephens eta., 1991). Barriers 
placed immediately lateral to Hensen's node at stages 6 to 8, between the 
segmental plate and intermediate mesoderm between stages 10 and 11, 
and between the intermediate and lateral plate mesoderm between stages 
13 and 15 resulted in absence or malformation of the wing. When barriers 
were placed between the neural tube and somites, or between the somites 
and intermediate mesoderm at stages 13 to 15, the limbs were normal in all 
cases (Stephens at a/., 1991). The authors argue that their results, when 
taken together with the experiments mentioned above, indicate that an 
inductive factor passes from Hensen's node to the segmental plate prior to 
stage 11, and at stage 12 it moves from the segmental plate to the 
intermediate mesoderm. The factor would then pass to the adjacent the 
lateral plate mesoderm, where limb development would be induced. These 
experiments raised the possibility that a limb-inducing signal originates from 
the axial midline or is produced as a consequence of signals that originate 
medial to the lateral plate. The means by which limb induction is localized 
to two positions along the primary body axis could be either by localizing the 
inductive signals or by localizing the response to a more widespread signal, 
and this may involve repression of limbs in the flank.
7.1 Ectopic limb development
Formation of an appropriate number of limbs at appropriate positions 
does not always occur. Bateson addressed the question of extra limb 
formation, and reviewed several cases of vertebrates with additional limbs 
(Bateson, 1894). Interestingly, in his description of a frog with an extra hind 
limb, he noted that the extra leg may have had pattern duplications within it. 
In light of current knowledge of the distribution of polarizing potential in 
lateral plate mesoderm, this phenotype suggests that cells with polarizing 
activity were not confined to one side of the extra leg. Balinsky showed 
experimentally that competence to form a limb was not restricted to the 
regions that normally form the limb. He found that transplantation of otic 
placode, nose rudiment or hypophysis to the flank of an embryonic newt 
could induce formation of an ectopic limb bud that would develop into a 
complete limb (Balinsky, 1925, Balinsky, 1933, Balinsky, 1965). Balinsky 
noted that the identity of the ectopic limb (forelimb or hindlimb) was related to 
position along the body axis, and the polarity of these limbs was not always 
the same as that of the normal limbs. Some of these extra limbs may also 
have had pattern duplications in the a-p axis (Slack, 1977a). These 
experiments highlight the problems of how limb position is determined within 
the broad region of competent lateral plate mesoderm, and raise questions 
about the nature of the limb inducing signal.
7.2 Initiation of limb budding
The lateral plate mesoderm proliferates at a uniform rate along the 
anteroposterior axis prior to limb budding (Searls and Janners, 1971). The 
earliest differential can be seen when a localized thickening appears at the 
site of the prospective forelimb bud. Searls and Janners demonstrated 
experimentally that limb buds emerge at discrete positions along the lateral 
plate mesoderm as a result of localized maintenance of cell proliferation.
Their analysis showed that the mitotic index of limb and flank regions is the 
same up to stage 16, but the index decreases rapidly in the flank between 
stages 16 and 17, when the limb buds become visible. As Balinsky and 
Harrison initially showed in amphibians (see above), the chick flank is also 
competent to participate in limb development. Transplantation of 
prospective limb mesoderm to the flank results in development of an ectopic 
limb, and flank cells have been found within both the limb bud and 
differentiated cartilage (Dhouailly and Kieny, 1972). Limb mesenchyme 
transplanted under flank ectoderm induces the flank ectoderm to form an 
apical ridge (described below), which supports outgrowth of the ectopic bud 
into a complete limb (Carrington and Fallon, 1984, Saunders and Reuss, 
1974). Flank cells transplanted under the apical ridge of a limb bud, 
however, can not support the ridge and the ridge flattens over the flank cells. 
Thus, the region of lateral plate that actually forms limbs is only part of the 
region that is competent to form limbs, which suggests that signals localized 
to specific axial levels determine the positions at which limbs emerge. 
Moreover, these experiments suggest that the signal acts not only to 
maintain cell proliferation, but also changes the character of the cells from 
flank to limb, thereby allowing them to participate in the inductive interactions 
required for limb morphogenesis.
Very little is known about the molecular basis of limb bud initiation. 
Application of disulphiram (inhibitor of retinoid synthesis) to pre-limb bud 
stage chick embryos inhibits limb bud formation, suggesting that initiation of 
limb development is dependent on retinoic acid synthesis (Stratford, Horton, 
and Maden, 1996). Retinoic acid does not have limb inducing activity, 
however, as local application of retinoic acid to the flank of pre-limb bud 
stage chick embryos does not result in additional limb formation, although 
patterning of the normal legs can be affected (Wilde, Wedden, and Tickle,
1987). At the beginning of the work described in this thesis, FGFs were 
known to be involved in maintenance of limb outgrowth, and the possibility 
had arisen from overexpression studies by Heath and colleagues that FGF 
may also be involved in the initial budding of the limbs (see chapter 3). The 
work described in this thesis focuses on the role of FGF in initiation of 
vertebrate limb development. The work described in chapter 3 asks whether 
direct and local application of FGF to the flank of chick embryos can induce 
limb budding, and addresses the problem of establishing signaling regions 
in the bud. Chapter 4 describes experiments which investigate the role of 
Hox genes in controling the position at which limbs are specified in lateral 
plate mesoderm of chick embryos. In pythons, loss of specialization along 
the body axis is accompanied by loss of forelimbs and severe truncation of 
hindlimbs. In chapter 5, I investigate the developmental basis of 
limblessness and axial regionalization in pythons, with particular emphasis 
on the mechanisms controling limb position, limb bud initiation and 
patterning, and regional identity in the axial skeleton.
CHAPTER TWO: Materials and Methods
1. Application of FGF beads to chick embryos
Fertilized chicken eggs were incubated at 38C and the embryos 
were staged by counting somites according to Hamburger and Hamilton 
(Hamburger and Hamilton, 1951). Experiments were performed on embryos 
between stages 10 and 22. To improve visibility, a small amount of India or 
drawing ink (Pelikan) diluted 1:4 in tissue culture medium was injected 
under the blastoderm, or a small chip of 1% neutral red in 1% agar was 
placed on the vitelline membrane. The vitelline membrane was torn away 
from the right side of the embryo, and a small transverse slit was made with 
electrolytically-sharpened tungsten needles in the ectoderm covering the 
lateral plate mesoderm at a particular somite level. Heparin acrylic beads 
(H5263, Sigma) 125 - 250 pm in diameter were soaked in a 2pl drop of 
Minimum Essential Medium (MEM, Gibco-BRL) containing one of the 
following proteins for at least 1 hour at room temperature prior to 
implantation: FGF-1 (1 mg/ml; 132-FA-025 R&D Systems), FGF-2 (1 mg/ml; 
133-FB-025, R&D Systems), FGF-7 (1 mg/ml; 251-KG-010, R&D Systems), or 
FGF-4 (700pg/ml; kindly provided by Prof. John Heath, Birmingham) . A 
bead was inserted into the slit and manipulated into the appropriate 
anteroposterior position under the ectoderm. A few drops of tissue culture 
medium (MEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 1:100 
antibiotic/antimycotic and 2mM L-Glutamin^. all from Gibco-BRL) were 
added to the egg before it was resealed and returned to the incubator. 
Embryos were incubated for a total of 9-10 days.
2. Application of SHH beads to chick embryos
SHH beads were prepared using a recombinant form of the mouse 
SHH protein corresponding to the complete amino peptide (extending to
amino acid 198, kindly provided by Prof. Andy McMahon, Harvard; described 
in Yang and Drossopoulou et al., 1997). Affigel CM beads approximately 
150 pm in diameter were rinsed for 2-3 minutes in Tris chloride/sodium 
chloride buffer and then soaked in a 2 pi drop of SHH (16 mg/ml) for at least 
1 hour at room temperature. Beads soaked in this concentration of SHH can 
induce full digit duplications when applied anteriorly in chick wing buds 
(Yang and Drossopoulou at al., 1997). Embryos were prepared as 
described above for FGF beads.
3. Application of retinoic acid beads to chick embryos
Retinoic acid preparation and experiments were carried out in the 
dark. All-frans-retinoic acid (Sigma) was diluted in dimethylsulphoxide 
(DMSO) to the desired concentrations and stored at -2Q0C until needed. 
AG1-X2 beads in formate form (Biorad) between 200 -250 pm in diameter 
were soaked in retinoic acid/DMSO for 20 minutes at room temperature. 
Beads were then rinsed in tissue culture medium (as described in method 1 ) 
and implanted into the desired position in the embryo.
4. Whole-mount skeletal preparations: Aldan green staining
Embryos were removed from the egg, washed in IX  phosphate- 
buffered saline (PBS) and the membranes and internal organs were 
removed prior to overnight fixation in 5% trichloroacetic acid (TCA). They 
were then transferred to 0.1% Alcian green in acid alcohol for 6-16 hours. 
Alcian green was removed and the embryos were differentiated in acid 
alcohol overnight, dehydrated in 100% alcohol and cleared in methyl 
salicylate for analysis of skeletal patterns.
5. Whole-mount skeletal preparations: Alcian blue and Alizarin 
red staining
Embryos were washed in 1X PBS and fixed in 80% ethanol overnight. 
Skin, viscera and adipose tissue was cleared away and embryos were 
transferred to 96% ethanol for 24 hours. Embryos were then placed in 
acetone for at least 2 days, rinsed in 96% ethanol and stained for 2-6 hours, 
according to size, at 37C. 10 ml of staining solution was prepared with 1 ml 
of 0.3% Alcian blue stock , 1 ml Alizarin red stock, 1 ml acetic acid and 17 ml 
70% ethanol (Alcian blue stock: 0.3% Alcian blue in 70% ethanol, filtered; 
Alizarin red stock: 0.1% Alizarin red in 96% ethanol, filtered). Embryos were 
rinsed in 96% ethanol for 1-2 hours, rinsed in tap water for a further 1-2 
hours, and cleared in 1% Potassium Hydroxide (KOH) until the skeleton was 
visible. Clearing was continued in a graded sequence of 1 % 
KOH/Glycerine as follows: 20% Glycerine, 50% Glycerine, 80% Glycerine for 
2-5 days at each step. Embryos were then transferred to 100% Glycerine for 
photography and storage.
6. Scanning Electron Microscopy
SEM was used to examine early morphology of treated embryos. 
Embryos were incubated up to 56 hours following FGF application, then 
removed from the egg into PBS for washing and removal of membranes. 
They were fixed and stored in modified Tyrode's solution (1% 
gluteraldehyde) at 4^0. After post-fixation in 1% osmium in 0.1 M phosphate 
buffer for 1 hour, the specimens were dehydrated in graded ethanol washes 
and placed in amyl acetate. They were then dried by critical point-drying, 
mounted on metal studs, and sputter coated with gold particles. The 
embryos were observed using a Hitachi 8-530 scanning electron 
microscope.
7. Whole-mount in situ hybridization
For whole-mount in situ hybridization, embryos were removed from 
the egg and washed and dissected in 1x PBT (PBS with 0.1% triton). 
Embryos were fixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4C and 
dehydrated in a series of graded methanol washes. Embryos were stored in 
100% methanol at -20C. Processing and hybridization was carried out 
following the published protocol of Nieto et al. (Nieto, Patel, and Wilkinson,
1996), using digoxigenin-labelled riboprobes for the chick Hoxb9 (kindly 
provided by Dr. Robb Krumlauf, NIMR, Shh (kindly provided by Dr. Juan 
Carlos Izpisa-Belmonte, Salk Institute), HoxdQ and Hoxd13 (kindly 
provided by Prof. Denis Duboule, Geneva), Hoxc9 and Ptc (kindly provided 
by Dr. Cliff Tabin, Harvard), and Fgfd (kindly provided by Prof. Gail Martin, 
UCSF) genes.
8. Tissue transplantations
Grafts of chick and python flank tissue to host wing buds were 
performed as follows. Donor embryos were removed from the egg, staged 
and dissected in 1x PBS on a cold block. Pieces of flank tissue 
approximately 200-300 |im were excised from the appropriate position using 
electrolytically-sharpened tungsten needles. For chick embryos, somites 
were counted and used as a landmark for determining axial level in the 
lateral plate mesoderm, and for snakes, the coiling pattern of the embryo 
was used for this purpose. Host limb buds were prepared by removing 
enough of the vitelline membrane and amnion to expose the wing bud. The 
apical ridge was lifted away from the anterior or posterior limb bud 
mesenchyme using a tungsten needle to make a loop, and the graft was 
manipulated into the loop. The egg was resealed with clear adhesive tape 
and returned to the incubator.
Grafts of limb bud mesenchyme from python to chick were performed 
as follows. Python embryos were rinsed in 1X PBS, and the hindlimb bud 
was dissected off. The bud was divided into anterior, middle and posterior 
thirds, and the middle third was discarded. The anterior and posterior third 
were then divided into proximal and distal halves, and the distal halves were 
transferred separately to a 2% solution of Trypsin (1:250, Gibco-BRL) to 
remove the ectoderm. The mesenchymal tissue was then rinsed in tissue 
culture medium and grafted to chick wing buds as described above.
9. lontophoretic application of Oil and DiAsp
Small deposits of the lipophilic membrane dye Dil (Molecular Probes 
D-282) were applied in ovo to the lateral plate mesoderm of the flank, 
prospective limb bud, or limb bud by iontophoresis. Microelectrodes with a 
tip diameter of approximately 3pm were filled at their tips with a small 
quantity of Dil (3 mg/ml dimethyl formamide) and then backfilled with 1M 
lithium chloride. These were then inserted into an electrode holder 
connected to the positive pole of a 9 volt battery. The electrode was carefully 
micromanipulated through the ectoderm and into the somatic layer of the 
lateral plate mesoderm at the appropriate position. The dye was driven out of 
the electrode by completing the circuit with a second silver wire placed into 
the egg albumin and attached to the battery's negative terminal. Completing 
the circuit for about 8-10 seconds was sufficient to label a small patch of 
cells. Dye application was done under a dissecting microscope and the 
success and position of labelled cells then checked on an epifluorescent 
microscope fitted with an extra long working distance x20 objective. For 
double label experiments the membrane dye DiA (Molecular Probes D- 
3883) was applied in exactly the same way. The embryos were then 
allowed to develop for the stated time points and examined using Nikon 
fluorescence microscopy. For subsequent analysis of Hoxb9 expression in
labelled embryos, the embryos were fixed and mounted in 4% 
paraformaldehyde, photographed, and then dehydrated in graded methanol 
washes prior to processing for in situ hybridization.
10. Dig-FGF2
Dig-FGF2 at a concentration of 0.25 mg/ml was a kind gift from 
Professor John Heath, Birmingham. Activity of Dig-FGF2 at 0.25 mg/ml was 
tested by soaking heparin beads in 2 |il of protein under the same 
conditions described for unlabeled FGF, and then applying the beads to the 
flank of chick embryos. Presence of Dig FGF in situ was detected as follows. 
Embryos were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4^0 overnight. Embryos 
were then washed in PBT twice for 5 minutes each, and then twice for 30 
minutes each. Embryos were then blocked for 2-3 hours in PBT with 15% 
goat serum and 2% Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA). Anti-digoxygenin 
antibody (Boehringer Mannheim) was added at a concentration of 1:1000 
and embryos were incubated at 4^0 overnight. Embryos were washed 4 
times for 1 hour each in PBT with 0.1% BSA, and then transferred into NTMT 
alkaline phosphatase buffer, containing lOOmM Tris-HCI, pH 9.5 + 50mM 
MgCI + lOOmM NaCI + 0.1% Triton, for 30 minutes. Color reaction was 
achieved by transferring the embryos into a glass dish containing BM purple 
AP substrate (Boehringer Mannheim) and rocking the embryos in the dark at 
room temperature. Reaction was monitored and stopped by washing the 
embryos in PBS. Embryos were fixed and stored in 4% paraformaldehyde.
11. Microinjection of Dig-FGF2
Dig-FGF was lightly colored so that injection of the protein could be 
confirmed visually. Coloration was achieved by dipping a needle first into a 
2% solution of fast green and then into the FGF solution. Colored Dig-FGF 
was loaded into a micropipette with a tip diameter of approximately 3^m, and
the micropipette was carefully micromanipulated through the ectoderm and 
into the somatic layer of the lateral plate mesoderm at the appropriate 
position. Dig-FGF was driven out of the pipette and into the tissue by 
pressure-injection using a picospritzer (General Valve). Microinjection was 
done under a dissecting microscope and the success was confirmed 
visually, as described above. Embryos were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde 
at stated time points, and processed for immunostaining as described for 
Dig-FGF beads.
12. Antibody staining
Monoclonal antibodies against LMX1 (Riddle etal., 1995), MSX (Liem 
et al., 1995) and H0XC8 (Shashikant et a/., 1995) (all 3 kindly provided by 
Dr. Monica Ensini, Columbia), and polyclonal antibodies against FGF2 
(Dono and Zeller, 1994) (kindly provided by Dr. Rolf Zeller, EMBL), DLX 
(Panganiban et a., 1995) (kindly provided by Dr. Grace Panganiban and 
Prof. Sean Carroll, Wisconsin), EN (Davis eta., 1991) (kindly provided by 
Prof. Alex Joyner, NYU), SHH (Bumcrot, Takada, and McMahon, 1995, Marti 
etal., 1995b) (kindly provided by Prof. Andy McMahon, Harvard), H0XC6 
(Oliver et al., 1988a) (kindly provided by Prof. Eddy De Robertis, UCLA) and 
H0XB5 (Wall etal., 1992) (kindly provided by Dr. Nancy Wall, Wisconsin) 
were used to compare expression in chick and python embryos. Staining 
protocols varied according to the antibody and are listed below. All 
secondary antibodies were horseradish peroxidase-coupled (Jackson 
Immunochemicals) and for whole-mount staining, all steps were done on a 
rocking platform unless otherwise stated.
12a. Whole-mount antibody staining
Whole-mount staining with H0XC8 and SHH antibodies was carried- 
out on embryos fixed in ice cold 4% paraformaldehyde for 4-12 hours. 
Embryos were washed thoroughly in PBS and blocked and bleached in PBS
with 10% goat serum (heat inactivated), 1% BSA and either 1% H2O2 for 15 
minutes at room temperature (SHH) or 0.5% H2O2 overnight at 4C. 
Embryos were then washed in PBT and incubated with the primary antibody 
(1:5 for H0XC8 and 1:500 for SHH) in PBT with 1% goat serum and 1% BSA 
overnight at 4C plus 6 hours at room temperature. Embryos were washed in 
PBS with 1% goat serum and incubated with goat anti-mouse (1:500, 
H0XC8) or goat anti-rabbit (1:250, SHH) secondary antibodies in PBT with 
1% goat serum overnight at 4C plus 6 hours at room temperature. Embryos 
were then washed in PBS, pre-incubated for 1 hour in 0.5 mg/ml 3,3'- 
diaminobenzidene tetra hydrochloride (DAB, Sigma) at room temperature 
before color detection with activated DAB solution (containing 0.003% 
H2O2) The reaction was stopped with several rinses in PBS.
Whole-mount staining with antibodies against EN and H0XB5 was 
carried-out on embryos fixed in Dent's fixative (methanol: DMSO [4:1]) 
overnight at 4C, then bleached in Dent's with 5% H2O2 for 5 hrs at room 
temperature. Embryos were stored in methanol at -20OC. Embryos were 
then rehydrated through a graded methanol series into PBS, transferred into 
PBS with 2% instant skin)milk powder + 0.5% triton (PBSMT) and washed 
twice for 1 hour each. Primary antibody was added to PBSMT at a 
concentration of 1:500 (EN) or 1:200 (H0XB5) and embryos were incubated 
at 4C overnight. Embryos were then washed in PBSMT five times and 
incubated with a goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody at a concentration of 
1:200 (EN) or 1:500 (H0XB5) in PBSMT overnight at 4C. Embryos were 
washed in PBSMT, rinsed in PBT with 2% BSA, and pre-incubated in 0.6 
mg/ml DAB in PBT for 30 minutes. Color reaction was started by adding
0.03% H2O2 to fresh DAB solution, and was stopped with several washes in 
Whole mount staining with the H0XC6 antibody was carried out on 
embryos fixed in Dent's fix for 1-2 hours at 4C, then bleached in Dent's with 
5% H2O2 for 24 hours at room temperature. Embryos were washed twice in 
tris buffered saline pH 7.4 (TBS: 0.01M tris + 0.1M MgCI) with 0.1% tween 
(TBST) before incubating with primary antibody (1:75) in TBST with 20% goat 
serum overnight at 4C. Embryos were washed three time in TBS (1 hour 
each), and then incubated overnight at 4C with the secondary antibody, 
goat anti-rabbit (1:500), in TBST with 20% goat serum. Embryos were 
washed three times (1 hour each ) in TBS, pre-incubated in 0.5 mg/ml DAB in 
TBS for 30 minutes, and the reaction was carried-out by adding 0.02% H2O2 
to the DAB solution. The reaction was stopped by washing in TBS.
Whole mount antibody staining with the DLX antibody was as follows. 
Embryos were fixed overnight at 4C in a 1:3 mixture of 37% formaldehyde : 
fix buffer (fix buffer consisted of 1 33X PBS with 67mM EGTA). After washing 
3 times in methanol, embryos were treated with 3% H2O2 in methanol for 5 
minutes, and washed another 3 times in methanol. Embryos were stored at 
-2000 in methanol. Embryos were rehydrated through a graded methanol 
series into PBS, blocked in PBT with 2% BSA for 2 hours at 4C, and 
incubated overnight at 4C with primary antibody (1:36) in PBT with 2% 
BSA. After washing 10 times (12 minutes each) in PBT, embryos were 
incubated with secondary antibody, goat anti-rabbit (1:400), in PBT for 4 
hours at 4^0. Embryos were washed as before and pre-incubated in 0.5 
mg/ml DAB before the color reaction was started by adding 0.03% H2O2 to 
fresh DAB solution. The reaction was stopped with several rinses in PBT.
12b. Antibody staining frozen sections
Frozen sections were stained with antibodies against MSX, LMX1, 
FGF2, and EN using the Vectastain Elite ABC Kit (Vector Labs). Embryos
were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4^0, washed in PBS, and 
equilibrated in 30% sucrose. Embryos were then embedded in OCT and 
placed in a -70C freezer. Frozen blocks containing the embryos were 
mounted on studs and 10 pm sections were cut using a cryostat. Sections 
were collected on Superfrost slides (Fisher) and allowed to air dry. Sections 
were washed with PBS, bleached with 0.05% H2O2 in PBS, washed again 
and blocked in 5% horse (MSX and LMX1) or goat (FGF2 and EN) serum in 
PBT. Primary antibodies were added (MSX @ 1:4; LMX1 @ 1:30; FGF @, 
1:400; EN @ 1:500) to PBT with 1% horse or goat serum (as above) and 
slides were left to incubate overnight in a humid, airtight box at 4C. Slides 
were then washed with PBS and a biotinylated secondary antibody (horse 
anti-mouse for MSX and LMX1 and goat anti-rabbit for FGF2 and EN) was 
added according to the manufacturer's instructions. Slides were washed, 
incubated for 30 minutes in Vectastain ABC reagent, and washed again 
before pre-incubating them in DAB (0.5 mg/ml) for 5 minutes. Color reaction 
was carried-out by adding fresh DAB solution containing 0.006% H2O2 and 
the reaction was stopped with PBS. Slides were then washed in distilled 
H2 O, dried overnight, dehydrated through a graded ethanol series, 
immersed in histoclear twice (5 minutes each) and covered with Permount 
and a coverslip.
13. Nile Blue Sulphate staining
The pattern of cell death in python and chick limbs was visualized by 
staining with Nile Blue Sulphate. Limbs were dissected from embryos taken 
directly from the incubator, quickly rinsed in PBS that had been pre-warmed 
to the incubation temperature, and transferred to a pre-warm ed solution of 
1% Nile Blue Sulphate in a 35mm petri dish. The petri dish was immediately 
returned to the incubator for 2- 5 minutes, after which the limbs were rinsed 
in PBS and photographed.
CHAPTER THREE: FGF and Limb Initiation
1. Background
Although the molecular networks that operate in the limb bud have 
received much attention (see Chapter 1), very little is known about the 
molecular basis of limb bud initiation. A recent clue has emerged from work 
on chimeric mice combining wild type blastocysts or morulae with pluripotent 
embryonic stem (ES) cells which constitutively express FGF4. 
Overexpression of FGF4 leads to dramatic malformations in chimeric 
embryos, including reduction or deletion of the diencephalon and eyes, and 
development of multiple small limb bud structures from the flank (Abud et al., 
1996) The latter result suggested the possibility that FGFs may be involved 
in the initiation of limb budding. This chapter reports the results of 
experiments carried out in chick embryos to examine whether fibroblast 
growth factors are involved in initiation of limb development. The major 
finding is that FGF induces development of additional limbs. This discovery 
gave rise to a number of related questions that are presented in this chapter. 
Early development of additional limbs buds was investigated to determine 
how a limb bud is established from flank cells and how signaling regions 
arise in the limb. Grafting experiments were performed to investigate the 
competence of flank cells to express Shh. In light of the ability of FGF to 
activate Shh in flank cells, the effects of direct application of SHH to the flank 
were assayed. Finally, FGF and SHH were applied simultaneously to 
determine whether this affected the anteroposterior polarity of additional 
limbs.
2. Results
2.1 FGF beads induce additional limbs in chick embryos
Beads soaked in FGF (-1, -2 or -4) and implanted in presumptive flank 
lead to the development of additional limbs (Figure 4A-F). A major set of 
experiments was carried-out with FGF2, in which FGF2 beads were placed 
at different levels along the primary body axis in the lateral plate mesoderm 
of chick embryos between stages 13 and 17. Stage 13 is well before there is 
any sign of limb development, and at stage 17 a slight thickening in the 
lateral plate mesoderm marks the place where buds will form. When beads 
are placed in lateral plate mesoderm opposite somites 20 to 26 (presumptive 
flank lies between somites 21 and 25), additional limbs developed in 35 out 
of 42 embryos (Table 1). Both complete wings (Fig. 4a) and complete legs 
(Fig. 4c) could develop from the flank (summarized in Table 1 and Fig. 4). 
The rib cage often appeared to be pushed together distally on the treated 
side, but vertebral identity was unchanged (Fig. 4c). When beads soaked in 
FGF2 were placed anterior to somite 15 in the neck region (n = 4), or in the 
tail bud (n = 3), no additional limbs were produced.
Application of FGF2 to the flank prior to stage 13 did not result in 
additional limb formation. Embryos treated between stages 10 to 12 (n = 6 
cases) did not develop additional limbs, but the wing and leg were 
sometimes shifted along the body axis and appeared to be drawn together. 
Loss or fusion of limb elements, cleft neural arches, and rib fusions were 
also observed in these embryos. Ability of the flank to produce complete 
additional limbs lasts at least through stage 17, when wing and leg buds are 
present, but additional limbs could not be induced between stages 19 and 
22 (n=7).
FGF1 and FGF4 beads applied to the flank of stage 13-16 embryos
also induced additional limbs, but the limbs were less complete than those 
induced by FGF2, in that they rarely developed digits. Beads soaked in 
FGF7 (also known as Keratinocyte Growth Factor or KGF) and applied to the 
flank of stage 14-16 embryos did not lead to the development of additional 
limbs (n = 10). Nine of 10 embryos receiving FGF7 beads developed 
normally: however, a single embryo developed with a duplicated pattern in 
the leg (duplicated fibula and digit pattern || I I II III IV; = 
unidentifiable digit).
Beads soaked in PBS and implanted at flank levels had no detectable 
effects on embryo development (n = 4).
2.2 Identity and morphological pattern of additional limbs
The nature of the limb that developed was related to the position at 
which the FGF bead was placed along the body axis (Table 1). When FGF 
beads were placed in the anterior part of the flank (opposite somites 21 and 
22), 8 of the 9 limbs that developed were additional wings. FGF beads 
implanted to the mid-flank (opposite somite 23; n = 9) resulted in the 
development of either wings (5 cases) or legs (3 cases). The morphology of 
2 remaining limbs was not unequivocally characteristic of either wings or leg 
and was therefore classified as "limb", and one embryo developed two 
ectopic limbs; an ectopic leg and an ectopic limb. FGF beads placed slightly 
more posteriorly (opposite somite 24) also resulted in the formation of either 
wings (3 cases) or legs (3 cases). However, FGF beads placed still more 
posteriorly in the flank (opposite somite 25) induced only legs (5 cases).
A few implants were made at levels where the wing and leg would 
normally form. Two of these resulted in additional limbs which articulated 
near the normal leg and appeared to contain proximal leg elements and
wing digits (Fig. 4b and e). Unexpectedly, one of the FGF beads placed at 
wing level induced an extra leg.
Only one of the additional limbs with digits had a normal antero
posterior polarity and four limbs developed with unidentifiable digits. In all 
other cases, the a-p axis was clearly reversed (18 of 23 cases; Fig. 4a-c, e 
and f). Fig. 4a shows a good example; the additional wing has a sequence 
of digits 432, reading from anterior to posterior, which is reversed compared 
to the sequence of normal wing digits 234. In Fig. 4c, the additional leg has 
a reversed sequence of toes IV III II I, compared to the normal leg pattern I 
II III IV
Many of the limbs which developed wing digits following implantation 
of FGF beads in anterior or mid-flank (somites 20-23) also had an extra digit 
3 inserted into the pattern (6 of 11 cases). This gave, for example, patterns 
such as 4332 reading anteriorly to posteriorly (Fig. 4b and f). Limbs with 
reversed polarity which resulted from FGF beads in the posterior flank never 
had extra digits (Fig. 4a and c). Additional limbs could be fused with the 
normal wing. Fig. 4f shows an example of such a fusion which produced a 
mirror-image digit pattern of 2344332, with posterior digits in the middle. In 
some cases, forearm bones at the interface of the two limbs were fused into 
one wide element and posterior digits did not form (Fig. 4e).
In addition to causing ectopic limbs to develop, application of FGFs 
could cause the wing to shift posteriorly along the body axis (Fig. 4d). 
Occasionally wing and leg appeared to be drawn together, even when 
additional limbs did not form, and this could be accompanied by fusion of 
pelvic and shoulder girdles. FGF beads could also cause development of a 
single lateral outgrowth, extending from the anterior of the wing to the
posterior limit of the leg, rather than discrete limb buds. This led to 
development of a single outgrowth containing leg and wing skeletal 
elements. The skeletal pattern of these specimens was unlike that seen in 
bud fusions, in that proximal elements began as a single large bone which 
branched to give a humerus and a very wide femur. Similarly, the ulna and 
tibia began as one large bone which bifurcated at mid-shaft, but the radius 
and fibula appeared normal. There were no wing digits, but the foot was 
complete.
Histological analysis revealed the presence of muscles tendons and 
nerves in additional limbs, and the tendon pattern in the feet indicated that 
the dorsoventral axis is not reversed. Innervation of extra limbs was also 
examined in whole mount with the 3A10 antibody against neurofilament 
proteins. Although ectopic limbs contain nerves, the pattern of innervation is 
not complete. Interestingly, spinal axons which enter ectopic limbs do not 
originate from the same axial level as the limb, but instead they migrate 
along the trunk and into the limb from one or both of the normal plexi. Trunk 
nerves at the level of the extra limb undergo more branching on the side of 
the limb than those on the contralateral side, but they rarely enter the limb.
ADDITIO NAL LIMB DEVELOPM ENT ADDITIO NAL LIMB MORPHOLOGY
position  
(somite level)
Total
Normal 
(no ectopic 
lim bs) 
Normal
lim b(s)
shifted
Girdle
structures
Additional 
structures 
n (n)*
Additional 
structures 
n (n)
Additional 
lim b  
structures 
n (n)
Reversed
digit
pattern
Duplicated
digit
pattern
20 3 0 2 0 1 (0) 1 (1) 1 (1) 1 1
21 7 0 5 1 4 (3) 1 (1) 0 2 (1^) 1
22 4 0 3 0 4 (4) 0 0 4 3
23 9 0 5 0 5" (3) 3 (2) 2" (0) 3 1
24 10 1 4 2 3 (1) 3 (2) 1 3 0
25 7 0 0 2 0 5(4) 0 4 0
26 2 1 1 0 1 (1) 0 0 1 0
Flank Totals^ 37 1 1 7 5 16 (11) 12 (9) 3 (0) 16 (lb ) 5
Totals 42 2 20 5 18 (12) 13 (10) 4 (1) 18 (lb ) 6
(n) = number of addilionnl limbs vvilh digits. ^mbo-o developed 2 extra limbs and is included in 2 categories.
Polarity could not be determined d Flank includes somites 21-25 0)>1
Figure 4. Additional limbs produced by application of FGF2 
beads to the flank
Whole-mount chick embryos stained with Alcian green to reveal 
skeletal patterns, b, c, e and f at 10 days of development, a at 9 days, and 
d at 6 days. Anterior at top of page, except in f. a. Additional wing that 
developed between normal wing and leg after implantation of a bead 
opposite somite 24 at stage 17. Note the reversed polarity of the digits, with 
a pattern of 432 compared to the normal wing pattern of 234. Dorsal view,
b. Additional limb that developed after implantation of an FGF2 bead 
opposite somite 20, at stage 14. The limb consists of proximal leg structures 
(femur [F], tibia and fibula [t/f]) with wing digits. Note reversed digit pattern, 
4332, with duplicated digit 3. Additional femur is anterior and articulates 
between the pubis (p) and an additional ischium (arrow). Normal ischium (i). 
Ventral view c. Additional leg that developed following bead implantation 
to the mid-flank, opposite somite 23 at stage 15, with digit pattern in reversed 
polarity (IV III II I). Digit IV is not complete. Note additional ischium 
(arrow), as in b. Ventral view. d. Embryo stained but not cleared 4 days 
after bead implantation opposite somite 21. The wing on the treated (right) 
side is truncated and appears to be shifted posteriorly along the body axis. 
The additional limb is also truncated. Dorsal view. e. Fusion of additional 
limb and normal wing following bead implantation opposite somite 26 at 
stage 13. The forearm of the fused limb consists of radius, ulna, radius and 
the digit pattern is 2332. Note absence of digit 4 and single ulna. Dorsal 
view. f. Fusion of additional wing and normal wing following bead 
implantation opposite somite 23 at stage 14. The normal wing, with digit 
pattern of 234, is connected by soft tissue to the additional wing, which has 
a reversed sequence of digits in a pattern of 4332. Proximally there is a 
double set of skeletal elements. Anterior is to the left; dorsal view.
2.3 Early development of additional buds
By 24 hours after insertion of an FGF2 bead in the flank, a small 
swelling was seen adjacent to the bead. By 48 hours, an additional limb bud 
was present between wing and leg buds (Fig. 5a and b). Initial formation of 
additional limb buds was slightly delayed in comparison to normal limb 
buds, and this is why additional buds often appeared smaller than the 
normal buds (Fig. 5a). The bud was capped with a well-developed apical 
ectodermal ridge (Fig. 5a and b). At this time, the bead could be found 
proximal to the bud.
The shape of additional limb buds was variable. Comparison of limb 
bud shape 48-72 hours after FGF treatment with the skeletal pattern of the 
additional limb at 10 days revealed that normal-shaped buds developed into 
complete limbs, while very narrow buds gave rise to truncated limbs. In 
some embryos, as the extra bud continued to grow, the original wing bud 
remained small and often took on an abnormal, pointed shape. These buds 
lagged behind the extra bud and the leg bud, and resulted in truncated 
wings often consisting of only a humerus or a humerus and radius. 
Occasionally, the additional limb bud was fused with the wing bud, and the 
types of patterns seen in Fig. 4e a n d f were obtained.
Figure 5. Scanning electron micrograph of embryo with ectopic 
limb bud 48 hours after bead implantation
Ventral view. a. Low power view showing position of ectopic bud between 
wing bud and leg bud. Thickened apical ridge on ectopic bud marked by 
arrows. Note tail posteriorly. b. High power view of
ectopic bud (upper bud) showing apical ectodermal ridge (arrows). 
Compare with ridge of leg bud at bottom right.
M  Ectopic 
%^bud
2.4 FGF acts within two hours
A series of experiments was performed in which FGF2 beads were 
implanted in the flank and the embryo was reincubated for a fixed time, at 
which point the FGF bead was removed from the tissue through a small slit 
made with a tungsten needle. The embryo was then reincubated to 
embryonic day 10. Removal of the FGF bead as early as 2 hours after 
implantation, at stage 14/15, did not interfere with bud outgrowth, and the 
bud went on to develop into an additional limb. One interpretation of this is 
that a brief exposure to FGF sets in train a cascade of gene expression 
which results in limb formation. Alternatively, FGF could be sequestered in 
the extracellular matrix and act after the bead has been removed.
To further investigate the distance and time over which FGF acts, 
digoxigenin-tagged FGF2 was used to allow detection of the protein in vivo 
by immunochemistry with an antibody against digoxigenin. Beads soaked in 
0.25 mg/ml Dig-FGF2 induced development of additional limb buds (n=3). 
Embryos fixed for Dig antibody staining between 1:30 and 43 hours after 
implantation of Dig-FGF2 beads to the flank showed intense staining on the 
surface of the bead (n=7/7). Six of 7 embryos showed Dig staining on 
surrounding cells up to 5-6 pm from the bead (Figs. 6a and b). The 
remaining embryo (fixed at 27 hours) showed diffuse rather than localized 
staining. Diffuse staining also resulted when beads were implanted deeper 
in the lateral plate so that they came to lie in the coelom (n=2. Fig. 6c). This 
may be due to the bead not being embedded in tissue, but being wedged 
into a space, which would facilitate free diffusion wherever the bead is not in 
contact with tissue.
To determine whether FGF could still be detected after removal of the 
bead from the flank, Dig-FGF beads were implanted in the flank
somatopleure and embryos were reincubated for either 1.6 or 2 hrs, at which 
point the bead was removed and the embryo was fixed immediately for 
antibody staining. In 3 of 3 cases, no staining could be detected in the tissue 
after removal of the Dig-FGF bead (Fig. 6d). These specimens were 
processed with embryos in which the bead was left in place, and positive 
staining in the latter served as an internal control. The absence of 
detectable FGF in the flank after removal of the bead suggests that FGF acts 
on the flank cells within the 2 hour exposure period.
These results suggest that brief exposure to a local FGF signal is 
sufficient to induce limbs. To test whether a local source of FGF is 
necessary, Dig-FGF2 colored with fast green was microinjected into the 
somatopleure of the flank. Stage 15 embryos were injected with Dig- 
FGF2/fast green opposite somite 23 (n=2) or 24 (n=3), reincubated, and fixed 
at 2.5, 3.5 or 72 hours for antibody staining. At 72 hours embryos had not 
developed ectopic limbs (n=2), and Dig-FGF2 could not be detected by 
antibody staining. Embryos fixed and stained at 2.5 and 3.5 hours were also 
negative for Dig-FGF (n=3. Fig. Be). To determine whether fast green 
interferes with activity or detectability of Dig-FGF2, fast green-treated Dig- 
FGF2 was loaded onto heparin beads and applied to the flank. Additional 
limb buds developed and Dig-FGF2 could be detected immunochemically in 
all cases (n=3). Thus, microinjection of FGF is not sufficient to induce ectopic 
limbs and no FGF can be detected in the targeted tissue, suggesting that 
when FGF is injected (rather than presented localized on a bead surface) it 
appears to dissipate in the tissue.
Figure 6. Distribution of Digoxigenin-tagged FGF2 after 
application to the chick flank
Dorsal views, a Dig staining 2 hours after a bead soaked in Dig-FGF2 was 
applied to the flank of a stage 13 chick embryo. Note absence of stain in 
tissue surrounding the bead. b. High power view of the bead shown in 
panel a indicates that FGF is limited to the surface of the bead and cells 
immediately around the bead. c. Dig staining 1.6 hrs after Dig-FGF bead 
was implanted into the coelomic cavity of the flank at the level of somites 23 
and 24. Note that FGF can be detected much further from this bead 
compared to that shown in a and b. d. Embryo in which a Dig-FGF bead 
was implanted opposite somite 22, and removed after 2 hours via a small slit 
made opposite somite 23. This specimen was immediately fixed and probed 
with the anti-Dig antibody. Staining is absent, e. Embryo 3.5 hours after 
Dig-FGF2 was micro injected opposite somite 22. Staining is absent.
2.5 Molecular polarity of early buds
Polarity of early limb buds was investigated by looking at expression 
of 2 genes, Sonic hedgehog and Hoxd-13, which are normally expressed 
posteriorly. Whole mount in situ hybridization was carried out between 4 
and 48 hours after FGF2 bead implantation. The first run of in situs for Shh 
was carried out by Juan Carlos Izpisa-Belmonte on embryos manipulated 
by me, and all subsequent runs were carried out by me. The earliest time at 
which Shh transcripts could be detected in the flank is 24 hours after FGF 
bead implantation (1 of 2 cases). All embryos examined from 25.5 to 48 
hours after FGF bead implantation were positive for Shh in the additional 
bud (n = 10; Fig. 7a). Shh transcripts could not be detected in the flank of 
any of the embryos examined between 4 and 23.5 hours after bead 
implantation (n = 6), nor in the second embryo examined at 24 hours. Shh 
expression in the notochord was used as a control, and each specimen was 
positive for Shh in the notochord. Similarly, low levels of Hoxd-13 
expression could be detected in the flank at 24 hours after application of FGF 
(1 of 2 cases). At 48 hours after FGF2 application, additional limb buds had 
been established and an ectopic domain of Hoxd-13 expression was clearly 
seen in addition to the ectopic Shh expression domain (n = 3; Fig. 7). 
Transcripts of both genes were restricted to the anterior margin of the 
additional limb buds, which is opposite to normal buds in which these genes 
are expressed posteriorly. Thus, additional limb buds are established with 
the molecular polarity reversed in the anteroposterior axis.
Figure 7: Sonic hedgehog  and Ho x d 1 3  are expressed in
additional limb buds
Distribution of Hoxd-13 (a) and Sonic hedgehog (b) transcripts in whole- 
mount preparations of embryos with additional limb buds 48 hours after 
FGF2 bead implantation. Regions to which the probes have hybridized are 
stained purple. Expression of Hoxd-13 and Sonic hedgehog is restricted to 
the posterior margin of the normal wing and leg buds, but is found anteriorly 
(arrows) in the additional limb buds.
Hoxd13
2.6 Competence of flank cells to express Shh
Activation of Shh in flank cells indicates that although these cells do 
not normally express Shh, they have the potential to do so when presented 
with FGF. Activation of Shh only at the anterior margin of ectopic limbs, 
although the entire bud is rimmed by an apical ridge, suggests that 
competence to express Shh is not uniformly distributed throughout the flank. 
Consistent with this idea is the observation that when cells taken from 
different positions along the anteroposterior axis of the prospective flank are 
grafted to the anterior margin of a wing bud, anterior cells have higher 
polarizing activity than do posterior cells (Hornbruch and Wolpert, 1991 ). To 
determine whether these results reflect differential competence to express 
Shh , flank somatic mesenchyme from different axial levels ranging from 
somites 21-25 was taken from stage 17 embryos and transplanted under the 
anterior apical ridge of stage 20 wing buds. Embryo receiving grafts were 
assayed for Shh expression by in situ hybridization between 12 and 27 
hours after transplantation. Shh could not be detected in grafted tissue from 
any position prior to 21.5 hours, although in all cases a normal pattern of 
Shh expression was detected in the host (n=3). Shh expression is activated 
in flank tissue in a graded fashion, with anterior flank cells being capable of 
expressing higher levels of Shh than posterior cells, between 21.5 to 27 
hours. Thus, when flank tissue opposite somite 21 was grafted under the 
apical ridge of a host limb, strong Shh expressiorj^^detected in the graft (2 of 4 
cases, the remaining 2 grafts were completely negative; Fig. 8a ). Flank 
tissue opposite somite 22 also expressed high levels of Shh (2 of 2 cases, 
Fig. 8b). In contrast, when tissue opposite somite 23 was grafted to a host 
wing, considerably lower levels of Shh were observed in the graft (n=1, Fig. 
8c). At similar time points, Shh expression was barely detectable in grafts of 
flank tissue originating opposite somite 24, and then only in cells 
immediately under the apical ridge (n=1. Fig. 8d). Tissue grafted from
opposite somite 25 also failed to activate Shh (n=2, Fig. 8e).
To compare directly these results with polarizing potential as 
demonstrated by Hornbruch and Wolpert (1991), two embryos which 
received grafts of flank opposite somite 22 and 25 were allowed to develop 
to E10. Analysis of the skeletal pattern of these embryos showed that flank 
cells from opposite somite 22 induced a digit pattern 433234, reading from 
anterior to posterior, and cells originating opposite somite 25 induced 2234 
pattern of digits. These results indicate that the potential to express Shh is 
distributed in an anterior to posterior gradient in the flank, consistent with the 
graded distribution of polarizing potential.
Figure 8. Activation of Shh in flank cells transplanted under the 
apical ridge
Lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) transplanted from different positions in the 
flank to the anterior margin of a chick wing, under the apical ridge, were 
assayed for expression of Shh. Axial level was determined using the 
somites (parax = paraxial mesoderm) as landmarks. Anterior is at the top of 
the page. Arrows indicate position of graft in limb. Strong Shh expression is 
detected in flank cells grafted from LPM opposite somites 21 (a) and 22 (b).
c. Shh expression is also detected in flank cells grafted from LPM opposite 
somite 23, but expression appears weaker than that seen in a and b. d. 
Very weak Shh expression is detected in flank cells grafted from LPM 
opposite somite 24. e. Flank cells grafted from LPM opposite somite 25 do 
not express Shh.
Parax LPM
j  je .-
- -, 25
2.7 Application of SHH to the flank
Establishment of a polarizing region is a key step in limb 
development. Application of SHH to the anterior of established limb buds 
induces anterior expansion of the Fgf4 and Fgf8 expression domains in the 
overlying ectoderm, and reproduces the positive feedback loop between the 
polarizing and the apical ridge (Laufer et al., 1994, Niswander at a/., 1994, 
Ohuchi at al., 1997) The above results (also see introduction) show that 
application of FGF to the flank activates Shh in the flank. In order to 
determine whether activation of Shh in the flank is sufficient to induce 
ectopic limb formation, SHH protein was applied directly to the flank of chick 
embryos between stages 14 and 17. Application of SHH beads to the flank 
of chick embryos did not result in formation of additional limbs (n=18. Table 
2). SHH beads were applied at different positions in the flank between 
somites 22 and 25, as well as opposite somite 26 in the prospective leg. 
Forty-eight hours after application of SHH to the flank, a small thickening of 
flank cells could be seen lateral to the bead, which is consistent with the 
proposed mitogenic effect of SHH on mesenchymal cells (Fan and Tessier- 
Lavigne, 1994) (Fig. 10c). Although application of SHH did not induce 
additional limb development, irrespective of the position at which it was 
applied, several aspects of normal limb development were affected. 
Malformations of shoulder and pelvic girdles were observed, including 
shortened scapula (Fig. 9a), anteriorly or medio-laterally expanded ilium, 
thickened ischium, and fused pubis, ischium, and ilium (n=6; Fig. 9b). In one 
case in which the entire innominate was fused, the leg was completely 
absent (Fig. 9B). Rib malformations also resulted. Ribs with distal 
bifurcations were observed in 7 of 18 embryos, and ectopic ribs were 
observed in 3 embryos (Table 2; Fig. 9c, d).
When SHH was applied the posterior flank, opposite somite 24 or 25,
or to the anterior of the prospective leg bud, opposite somite 26, the leg 
could develop with duplicated digits (n=2; Table 2; Fig. 10a and b). 
Application of SHH to the anterior margin of the chick wing results in anterior 
extension of the apical ridge and Fgf8 expression (Ohuchi et al., 1997). In 
order to determine whether application of SHH to the flank could extend the 
apical ridge of the leg bud, Fgf8 expression was examined by in situ 
hybridization 48 hours after application of SHH to the posterior flank. 
Application of SHH opposite somite 25 resulted in anterior extension of Fgf8 
expression in the leg bud and a separate domain of weak expression in the 
flank (Fig. 10c, d). Ptc expression was also localized to the flank cells 
around the bead, but surprisingly, ectopic Ptc transcripts could not be 
detected in the leg (Fig. 10c). Thus, SHH alone can induce expression of 
Fgf8 in flank ectoderm and local proliferation of flank cells, but this is not 
sufficient to induce additional limb development.
2.8 Application of FGF2 and SHH to the flank
Establishment of a polarizing region is necessary for outgrowth and 
patterning of the limb, and the position of the polarizing region dictates limb 
polarity. In order to determine whether application of SHH to the posterior 
flank could affect the a-p polarity of the extra limb, FGF2 was applied to the 
posterior flank and at the same time mSHH198 beads were implanted 
adjacent to the FGF beads (Table 2B). When FGF beads alone are placed 
opposite somites 24 and 25, additional limbs develop in 12 of 17 cases 
(Table 2). When SHH beads alone are placed opposite somites 23 and 24, 
no additional limbs develop in 10 of 11 cases, and the remaining embryo 
dveloppa leg with duplicated digits. However, when both SHH beads and 
FGF beads were implanted simultaneously, so that the SHH and FGF beads 
were opposite 23 and 24 respectively or 24 and 25 respectively, 4 of 5 
embryos developed with a pattern duplications in the leg. The digit patterns
were ll- l- l- ll- lll- IV  and lll- ll l- ll- ll- ll l IV (anterior to posterior), and 2 
embryos had duplicated fibulae (Fig. 10. Thus, simultaneous application 
of FGF and SHH appears to interfere with the limb inducing activity of FGF, 
and instead results in leg duplications. An additional limb (a leg) developed 
in only 1 of 5 cases (Table 2B), and surprisingly, the additional leg still had a 
reversed pattern of digits. When SHH was added to the posterior flank 24 
hours after FGF application, only one of 4 embryos had a duplicated leg, and 
the remaining 3 embryos developed additional legs, all with reversed 
polarity (Table 2B). These results suggest that, during normal development, 
expression of SHH defines a boundary which spatially limits the extent of 
cells that can participate in limb bud formation. Thus, the position of the Shh 
domain initially defines the posterior edge of the limb bud, and controls the 
anteroposterior pattern of elements that develop within the bud.
Table 2. Effects of mSHH198 beads applied to lateral plate mesoderm of 
chick embryos*
A. mSHH198
Som ite
position n Normal
Duplicated
Bifid
Ectopic
Malform
girdle
2 2 2 1 0 0 0 1
2 3 6 1 0 5 1 1
2 4 5 1 1 1 1 2
2 5 2 0 1 1 1 1
26 (leg) 3 1 2 0 0 1
Totals 1 8 4 4 7 3 6
embryos may be included in more than 1 category
B. mSHH198 + FGF2
Effects of mSHH198 and FGF2 beads applied to flank mesoderm
Protein somite level  Additional limi) OuDlicated Ic
mSHH 198 2 3 6 0 0
24 5 0 1
25 2 0 1
FGF2 2 3 9 9 0
2 4 10 7 0
25 7 5 0
mSHH 198 2 3 / 2 4
+ + 5 1 4
FGF2 2 4 / 2 5
FGF + 2 3 / 2 4 2 2 0
mSHH 24 hr later +
24/25 2 1/2 1/2
Figure 9. Skeletal malformations induced by application of SHH 
protein to the flank
Ten day chick embryos stained with Alcian green and cleared to reveal the 
skeletal pattern, a. Application of SHH to flank opposite somite 23 at stage 
14 resulted in development of a shortened scapula on the treated (right) side 
compared to the untreated (left ) side (red arrows), b. Application of SHH 
opposite somite 24 at stage 15 resulted in severe malformation of the 
innominate and loss of the leg on the treated side. c. High power view of 
the embryo showed in a, showing severe malformation of the ribs, including 
bifurcation, fusion, and truncation. One additional rib has also developed on 
the treated side, resulting in 9 ribs on the right and 8 ribs on the left. d. 
Disorganization of the ribs resulting from application of SHH opposite somite 
23 at stage 16.
Control
Figure 10. Application of SHH beads to posterior flank alters 
patterning of the leg
Anterior is at top of page, a, b and e are 10 day embryos stained with 
Alcian green. The embryo shown in c and d was fixed 48 hours after SHH 
application opposite somite 25. a. Application of SHH opposite somite 25 
at stage 15 resulted in development of a small extra digit (*) anterior to digit I 
in the foot. The identity of this digit is unclear, although the number of 
phalanges suggests that it may be an extra digit I. b. Application of SHH 
opposite somite 24 at stage 15 resulted in duplication of digit III and digit II, 
and the proximal fibula (F). c, d. Image shown in d is a high power view of 
embryo shown in c. Forty-eight hours after application of SHH opposite 
somite 25, a small bud had formed in the flank (straight arrow). Fgf8 
expression was detected in flank ectoderm over the bud, and Ptc expression 
was detected around the SHH bead (S). FgfS expression in the apical ridge 
of the leg bud extends further anteriorly on the treated side (curved arrow in
c) than on the untreated (left) side. d. Simultaneous application of a FGF 
bead opposite somite 25 and a SHH bead opposite somite 24 at stage 15 
resulted in a severely duplicated pattern in the foot. A complete extra fibula 
and duplicated digits IV, III and II are seen anterior to the normal structures. 
Digit I has been eliminated from the pattern.
Roman numerals = digit identity, T = tibia, F = fibula and S = SHH bead.
3. Discussion
Local application of FGF protein to the flank of the chick embryo 
initiates development of a limb bud which establishes a new axis of proximo- 
distal outgrowth and can develop autonomously into a complete limb. Limb 
identity is determined by position of the FGF bead, with anteriorly placed 
beads inducing mostly wings and posteriorly placed beads inducing mostly 
legs. Additional limbs have reversed anteroposterior polarity and 
mesenchyme cells in the anterior flank are competent to express high levels 
of Shh , which determines the anterior position of the polarizing region. A 
brief exposure to FGF is sufficient to induce limb formation, and FGF acts 
very locally rather than long-range. Although FGF induces Shh expression 
in the flank, application of SHH alone does not initiate limb development. 
SHH does, however, appear to define the anteroposterior limit of the limb 
bud, and application of SHH adjacent to the anterior edge of the FGF bead 
inhibits formation of a discrete limb bud, and results in an anteroposteriorly 
compressed outgrowth that becomes entrained into the leg. These results 
suggest that local production of a fibroblast growth factor determines limb 
position along the body axis, the type of limb that forms depends on position 
of the initiation signal, and the same signal can induce both wings and legs.
3.1 Initiation of a Limb by Application of FGF
Application of FGF elicits limb formation from the flank in chick 
embryos. Thus the flank has a limb forming potential that is normally not 
realized. Constitutive FGF4 expression in chimeric mice also stimulates limb 
bud outgrowth from the flank (Abud et al., 1996). Fibroblast growth factors 
can promote proliferation of limb mesenchyme cells (Niswander and Martin, 
1993), and FGF could act to maintain cell proliferation in the region where 
limb buds will form (see Searls and Janners, 1971). However, the fact that 
SHH can induce cell proliferation and expression of Fgf8 yet no limb forms
suggests that cell proliferation is not enough, and the character of the flank 
cells must somehow be changed to limb. Additional limbs developed even 
when the FGF bead was removed as early as two hours after bead 
implantation, and 22-23 hours prior to activation of Shh. The late response 
of Shh to FGF suggests that intermediate steps are involved and Shh is not 
directly activated by the FGF bead. When Dig-labelled FGF is used in bead 
removal experiments, labelled protein could not be detected in the embryo 
after the bead was removed. It is therefore unlikely that in these experiments 
FGF released from the bead could be sequestered in the extracellular matrix 
(Klagsbrun and Baird, 1991) and act after the bead has been removed. A 
more likely hypothesis is that FGF acts within two hours to induce a cascade 
of gene expression in flank cells, and, at least between 2 hours (when the 
bead is removed) and 17 hours (when endogenous FgfW  is induced 
[Ohuchi et al., 1997]) this pathway is not dependent on continuous presence 
of FGF. Moreover, the cascade must be initiated by a very small group of 
cells, as the effect of the FGF bead is very short-range, on the cells 
immediately surrounding the bead.
3.2 Reversed Polarity of the Additional Limbs
A striking feature of additional limbs is that they almost always have a 
reversed antero-posterior polarity. In ectopic buds, Shh and Hoxd-13 
expression is found at the anterior margin (the reverse of the normal limb) 
and this correlates with the reversed pattern of digits. Occasionally, the 
ectopic bud is fused with the normal wing bud and these develop into limbs 
which have a mirror-image pattern of digits, with posterior digits in the 
middle. This pattern is consistent with signaling from a shared polarizing 
region.
The results in this chapter show that Sonic hedgehog, although not
normally expressed in the flank, can be activated in flank cells with potential 
polarizing activity. Previous grafting experiments have shown that potential 
for polarizing activity extends from the posterior of the prospective wing bud 
to cells in the posterior flank in chick embryos, but the intensity of polarizing 
potential is appears to be distributed in a gradient that is highest anteriorly 
(Hornbruch and Wolpert, 1991). Although this activity normally remains 
dormant in the flank, the cells can produce a polarizing region signal and 
induce digit duplications when transplanted to a wing bud. Grafting flank 
cells under the apical ridge results in activation of Shh in the graft within 22 
hours. Similarly, transcripts first appear as the extra limb bud begins to 
emerge around 24 hours after bead implantation. The graded potential of 
flank cells to activate Shh correlates with polarizing activity demonstrated by 
Hornbruch and Wolpert (1991), and this explains the anterior position of the 
polarizing region in ectopic buds. Although cells at the posterior limit of the 
flank have very weak polarizing activity, they do not appear^switch on Shh 
(or at least there is no detectable Shh) when grafted under the ridge. 
Polarizing activity in these cells may be mediated by signals downstream of 
Shh, such as Bmp2, which has been shown experimentally to be able to 
activate Fgf4 and Hoxd13 and induce formation of digit 2 independent of 
Shh (Duprez et al., 1996). Buds that develop when FGF is applied to 
anterior flank often have additional digit 3's, although only a discrete region 
expressing Shh is induced. The slope of the gradient of potential polarizing 
activity is shallow in anterior flank (Hornbruch and Wolpert, 1991) and 
therefore, cells next to Shh-expressing cells could have weak polarizing 
activity which specifies the additional digit(s).
3.3 Establishment of the polarizing region
It seems likely that cells with highest potential polarizing activity are 
induced by FGF to express Shh and form a polarizing region. During normal
development, cells with this potential lie at the posterior edge of the region 
that normally forms the limb bud, and activation of Shh in these cells leads to 
development of a discrete polarizing region. Charit et al. (1994) have 
shown that anterior extension of the Hoxb8 domain in transgenic mice, so 
that it is expressed throughout the early forelimb bud, results in ectopic Shh 
at the anterior margin of the forelimb bud. Hoxbd and potential polarizing 
activity are coextensive in the flank (Lu et al., 1997, Stratford et al., 1997), 
creating a situation in the flank that is similar to that seen in the forelimb of 
the transgenic mouse; i.e., expression of Hoxbd throughout the bud. In both 
the forelimb of the transgenic mouse and the ectopic limb of the chick flank , 
Shh is activated in a discrete domain. How does a discrete domain of Shh 
expression form in limb buds which express Hoxbd throughout? In slightly 
older limb buds, both retinoic acid and FGF are required for ectopic 
activation of Shh (Niswander et ai, 1994), and retinoic acid appears to 
induce polarizing activity by induction of Hoxbd (Stratford et al., 1997; Lu et 
al., 1997). An attractive hypothesis is that retinoids induce polarizing 
potential through Hoxbd, and FGF allows this potential to be realized. The 
domain of Shh expression may be defined in response to different threshold 
levels of FGF8 and H0XB8 protein, such that in the presence of Hoxbd, an 
appropriate concentration of FGF can switch on Shh. In essence, the range 
of FGF diffusion determines the location of the Shh domain. Consistent with 
this idea, Stratford et al. (1997) have shown that high levels of FGF inhibit 
transcription of Hoxbd. Thus, Shh transcription would be induced in Hoxbd
expressing cells exposed^FGF8, as long as the concentration of FGF8 
remains below the threshold that inhibits Hoxbd. The Shh domain would 
end at the position where FGF has diffused below the minimum 
concentration required for Shh expression. This hypothesis can account for 
expression in a discrete patch at the edge of the apical ridge, rather than 
adjacent to or a distance from the ridge, in normal, ectopic and duplicated
limbs.
The ability of SHH to modulate the limb-inducing ability of FGF is 
curious. The apposition of Shh and Fgf domains at multiple sites in the 
embryo (Bueno et al., 1996) such as the posterior limb bud, suggests that 
Shh may limit the extent of FGF. One possibility is that high levels of SHH 
inhibit Fgf expression (which would keep FGF below levels which inhibit Shh 
expression). If the above hypothesis is correct, then duplication of the leg, 
rather than an ectopic limb, may arise when SHH and FGF are applied 
together because SHH inhibits activation of Fgf8 in the flank ectoderm 
anterior to the SHH bead. As a result, the flank cells posterior to the FGF 
bead may be entrained into the normal leg, and polarized by the SHH bead. 
Under these conditions, it may not be necessary to reprogram the flank cells 
to take on a limb identity, as other work has shown that flank cells can 
participate in limb development when mixed with normal limb cells 
(Dhouailly and Kieny, 1972). The occasional appearance of duplicated legs 
resulting from application of SHH alone to posterior flank may be a 
consequence of SHH respecifying pre-bud mesenchyme. The lack of Ptc 
expression in anterior leg is probably due to SHH acting on the leg at much 
earlier stages, or transcript levels being below the level of detection.
It has been proposed that a polarizing region signal and a fibroblast 
growth factor cooperate to establish a progress zone (Niswander at a., 
1993). Once a polarizing region has been established in the presumptive 
limb, mesenchyme cells under the influence of FGF will form a progress 
zone. Grafts of Shh- or Bmp2-expressing cells to the normal limb bud can 
induce Hoxd-13 expression in the progress zone (Riddle at a/., 1993; Duprez 
at a., 1996). Thus, activation of the Shh pathway could lead to activation of 
Hoxd genes in the presence of FGF.
3.4 Which FGF member initiates limb development in the normal 
embryo?
This work shows that at least 3 members of the FGF family can induce 
limb development from the flank. Although FGF1, FGF2 and FGF4 are able 
to elicit bud formation, none of these are likely to be the signal that normally 
initiates limb development. Fgf4 transcripts can only be detected in the limb 
once a bud is formed, and although expression in the dermamyotome is 
detectable at the time of limb bud initiation, it is not localized to limb levels 
(Niswander and Martin, 1992). FGF2 protein has been detected in limb and 
flank cells (Done and Zeller, 1994, Savage et al., 1993), yet no additional 
limbs develop from the flank, suggesting that endogenous FGF2 is not a 
probable candidate. Fgf1 also lacks a known signal sequence. However 
cells can be experimentally induced to release the protein in response to 
heat shock (Jackson at a., 1992). Since the findings reported in this chapter 
were published (Cohn at a., 1995), 2 new candidate FGFs have emerged as 
limb initiation signals from very recent work carried out in several labs. Fgf8 
has been shown to be expressed in the limb ectoderm as buds begin to 
emerge in the mouse, suggesting a possible role in very early stages of limb 
budding (Crossley and Martin, 1995, Ohuchi at a., 1994). Application of 
FGF8 (specifically, the FGF8b isoform) to the flank can induce Fgf8  
expression in the overlying ectoderm and result in ectopic limb development 
(Crossley ef a/., 1996, Vogel, Rodriguez, and Izpisa-Belmonte, 1996). Fgf8 
is expressed in the mesonephros prior to the stage at which limb budding is 
initiated. Crossley at al. proposed the hypothesis that FGF8 secreted from 
the mesonephric mesenchyme adjacent to the lateral plate is the 
endogenous signal that initiates limb budding and induces the limb 
ectoderm to express Fgf8 (Crossley at al., 1996). It is difficult for Fgf8 
expression in the mesonephros to account for localized limb induction, as
the expression domain is out of register with the region that forms the limb 
buds (Crossley et al., 1996, Vogel et a., 1996). Furthermore, Fgf8 is 
expressed in the mesonephros at flank levels at stages 13-14, a period 
when flank cells are responsive to an FGF inductive signal. Although 
expression in the flank is transient (Crossley et a/., 1996), it is clear that only 
a brief exposure (<2 hrs) is required to induce limb development (see 
section 2.4 in this chapter). Thus both FGF8 and FGF2 would require 
spatially restricted receptors, for example, if they are acting as endogenous 
limb inducers. FgfS expression in the limb ectoderm is detectable from stage 
16 (Crossley et a/., 1996, Vogel et a/., 1996), after limb budding has been 
initiated, which suggests that it may be involved in maintaining limb bud 
outgrowth but it cannot be responsible for initiation of the bud. Ohuchi et al. 
(1997) have recently reported that the Fgf 10 gene is expressed in the lateral 
plate mesoderm of the prospective limbs prior to FgfS expression in the limb 
ectoderm. FGF10 can induce additional limb development when applied to 
the flank, but the window of competence occurs between stages 12-13, 
which is earlier than that of other FGFs. FGF10 induces expression of FgfS, 
and FGF8 induction of FgfS appears to be mediated by FGF10. Thus, at this 
point it appears that FGF10 is the best candidate for the endogenous limb 
inducer, and FGF8 is a downstream target of FGF10. It should be noted, 
however, that FGF10 is expressed in the flank at a time when the flank can 
be induced by exogenous FGF10 to form a limb. Thus, if FGF10 is the 
endogenous inducer, then localized induction of a limb must require 
additional mechanisms (other than FgflO expression), such as repression of 
limbs in the flank that can be overcome by higher levels of FGF10.
FGF10 can induce limbs at earlier stages that other FGFs. FGF10 is 
believed to act through an ectoderm-specific FGF receptor (Ohuchi et al., 
1997), and the ectoderm may, in turn, relay a signal to the mesenchyme at
stages when other FGFs that act on the mesenchyme are able induce limbs. 
Thus, failure of additional limbs to develop when the (ectoderm-specific) 
KGF receptor is targeted could be due to a requirement for activation of a 
mesenchymal receptor at later stages of development. It will be interesting 
to test whether KGF can induce limbs at stages when FGF10 is known to act. 
The above would imply that induction of extra limbs by FGF1, FGF2, FGF4, 
and FGF8 after stage 13 may act to mimic a secondary signal that is may be 
induced by FGF10.
3.5 Control of limb position
The results suggest that local production of a fibroblast growth factor 
controls limb position. The nature of the signal that switches on FGF 
production at a particular axial level, and how its production is controlled are 
unknown. The position at which this signal is produced could be encoded 
by the pattern of Hox gene expression along the body axis. For example, in 
mice, frogs and zebrafish, upper limbs (fins) develop at a level that 
corresponds approximately to the anterior limit of expression of Hoxc6>'^
(Oliver et al., 1988; Molven et al., 1990). Loss of function mutations in the
Hoxb5 gene resul^development of a shoulder girdle that appears to be 
situated anterior to the normal position (Rancourt, Tsuzuki, and Capecchi, 
1995). The next chapter will exploit the finding that FGF can induce 
additional limbs to investigate the relationship between Hox genes and limb 
position.
3.6 Molecular basis of limb induction
Application of FGF induces formation of a limb at a level where limbs 
do not usually form. The entire flank can form limbs, but no additional limbs 
form when FGF is applied more anteriorly in the neck, or posteriorly in the 
tail. This supports the view that the field with limb forming potential extends
from the anterior edge of the upper limb to the posterior edge of the lower 
limb (Belinsky, 1965). The present results cast new light on experiments 
carried out over 70 years ago. Locatelli and Kiortsis deflected brachial 
nerves to the flank of newts and showed that limbs could regenerate from 
this position (Kiortsis, 1953, Locatelli, 1924). Interestingly, it has been 
suggested that early events in amphibian limb regeneration may be initiated 
by release of FGF-like molecules from traumatized nerves (Metscher and 
Gospodarowicz, 1979), and it is now known that FGF can substitute for nerve 
during regeneration of denervated limbs (Mullen et al., 1996). Balinsky 
grafted otic vesicle and nose rudiment to the flank of newt embryos and 
induced formation of additional limbs, often with reversed polarity (Balinsky, 
1925, Balinsky, 1933). It is now known that the mouse otic vesicle expresses 
Fgf-3 (Wilkinson, Bhatt, and McMahon, 1989) and the nasal placode and 
epithelium express Fgf-8 (Crossley and Martin, 1995, Heikinheimo at a., 
1994, Ohuchi at a., 1994). Thus, production of a fibroblast growth factor 
could be the molecular basis of the limb inducing ability of the tissues used 
by Balinsky.
CHAPTER FOUR: Hox  Genes and Specification Of Limbs
1. Background
Specification of limb position, number and type is a component of 
patterning the body axis, and must involve production of limb initiating 
signals at specific axial levels and interpretation of those signals by lateral 
plate mesoderm cells to determine limb type (forelimb versus hindlimb). 
The previous chapter showed how local application of Fibroblast growth 
factors (FGFs) to the prospective flank of chick embryos induces 
development of ectopic limbs with reversed anteroposterior polarity (Cohn et 
al., 1995). The same signal (FGF) can initiate formation of a wing or a leg 
but the position of FGF application along the lateral plate mesoderm 
determines whether forelimb or hindlimb forms. FGF applied to anterior flank 
induces ectopic wings and FGF applied to posterior flank induces ectopic 
legs. This suggests that the wing field is contiguous with the leg field in 
lateral plate mesoderm. The hypothesis that ectopic wings and legs are 
derived from separate cell populations was tested by tracing cell lineage 
during ectopic limb formation.
There is substantial evidence that patterns of Hox gene expression 
govern development of paraxial mesoderm into different types of vertebrae 
(Carroll, 1995). By analogy, Hox genes are good candidates for encoding 
positional identity in the lateral plate mesoderm. One particular combination 
of Hox gene expression could determine where a wing develops and 
another combination could determine where a leg develops. If this is the 
case, then formation of additional limbs at an inappropriate axial level 
should involve changes in Hox gene expression in the flank, and different 
patterns of Hox expression should be seen according to whether an 
additional wing or an additional leg is induced. This chapter examines the
role of Hox genes in patterning lateral plate mesoderm, by mapping 
expression of the Hox group 9 paralogues in lateral plate mesoderm during 
normal chick development, and comparing this with Hox expression patterns 
in embryos treated with FGF to induce ectopic limbs. Transplantation 
experiments were also carried-out in order to define the mechanisms that 
/ Hoxb9 expression during subsequent limb development.
2. Results
2.1 Cell lineage In ectopic wings and legs
In experiments described in the previous chapter, ectopic wings 
formed when FGF beads were placed in anterior flank and ectopic legs 
formed when FGF was applied to posterior flank. These results suggested 
the presence of two adjacent cell populations in the flank, one with the 
potential to form a wing and another with the potential to form a leg. To 
directly determine whether cells that form ectopic wings constitute a separate 
population to cells that form ectopic legs, a bead soaked in FGF2 was 
implanted in the flank either opposite somite (s) 21 (anterior flank), which 
induces mostly ectopic wings, or opposite s25 (posterior flank), which 
induces ectopic legs (data from Table 1; wing bud develops opposite s15- 
20, flank opposite s21-25, and leg bud opposite s26-32) . A small number of 
flank cells were then labelled with the fluorescent dyes Oil or DiA at different 
distances along the anteroposterior axis from the FGF bead, and positions of 
labelled cells were examined 48-72 hours later. FGF beads placed in 
anterior flank induced an ectopic bud posterior to the bead, and flank cells 
opposite s22 to 25, the entire span of the prospective flank, were 
incorporated into the bud (n=7; Fig. 11a). Cells just anterior to the FGF bead 
did not contribute (n=2). FGF beads placed in posterior flank induced an 
ectopic limb anterior to the bead, and cells opposite s22 to 24 were seen in 
ectopic buds (n=9), but neither cells opposite s21 (n=3) nor cells
immediately posterior to the bead (n=1) were incorporated (Fig. 11b,c). 
These results show, rather surprisingly, that when FGF beads are placed at 
opposite ends of the flank, almost the same population of cells contributes to 
the ectopic bud, which will form either wing or leg according to the position of 
the FGF bead. Thus, FGF can induce bidirectional changes in cell fate, and 
flank cells can be anteriorized to give rise to an ectopic wing or posteriorized 
to form an ectopic leg.
Figure 11. FGF induces bidirectional transformations in
flank cell fate to induce ectopic wings and legs.
(a, b) Schematic representation of lateral plate mesoderm with FGF bead (F) 
placed in anterior flank opposite s21 (a), a position which generally results 
in ectopic wings formation, or in posterior flank opposite s25 (b), a position 
which generally results in ectopic legs. FGF beads were implanted in the 
lateral plate mesoderm of the flank of stage 14-15 chick embryos and a small 
patch of cells at one or two positions were labelled with Oil and/or DiA at the 
time of bead implantation. Embryos were viewed under fluorescence 
microscopy 48 to 72 hours later. (+) indicates that cells labelled at this 
position contributed to the ectopic limb bud and (-) indicates that labelled 
cells did not contribute. Anterior at top.
(a) When beads were implanted opposite s21, cells labelled opposite s22 
(n=1), 23 (n=1), 24, (n=3), and 25 (n=1/2) were located in the ectopic bud. 
Cells labelled anterior to the bead, opposite s20 in the normal wing, were 
not detected in ectopic limbs (n=2).
(b) When beads were placed opposite s25, cells labelled opposite s24 
(n=1), 23 (n=4), and 22 (n=3/4) contributed to ectopic limbs. Cells in the 
anterior flank opposite s21 (n=3) and cells posterior to the bead, opposite 
s26 (n=1), were not detected in ectopic limbs.
(c) Triple exposure photomicrograph of ectopic limb bud to reveal positions 
of fluorescent cells 72 hours after implantation of a FGF bead opposite s25. 
At the time of bead implantation, flank cells were labelled with Oil (red) 
opposite s22 and DiA (green) opposite s23. Cells from both positions have 
contributed to the ectopic limb bud. Note the extent of cell spread in both 
anteroposterior and proximodistal axes compared to normal embryo shown 
in (d).
(d) Double exposure photomicrograph of a normal chick embryo in which 
flank cells opposite s22 had been labelled with Dil 48 hours earlier. 
Labelled cells remain in the flank as a small patch. There is no contribution 
to the limb buds and the cells have remained tightly clustered.
21 o 0 -
w + \ 0 +
0 + Ectopicwing
0 + 0 +
0 + / 0
0 - Leg 0 "
Ectopic
2.2 Dynamics of Hoxb9 expression in lateral plate mesoderm
Hox genes are involved in patterning lateral plate mesoderm along 
the body axis (Charit et al. 1994; Rancourt et al. 1995), however, in 
contrast to paraxial mesoderm, patterns of Hox gene expression in lateral 
plate mesoderm are not well characterized. Preliminary observations of 
Hoxb9 expression in limb bud stage mice and chicks suggested that the 
anterior expression boundary in lateral plate mesoderm could be related to 
limb position (Fig. 12a). Hoxb9 expression pattern was therefore mapped 
from stage 4, the definitive primitive streak stage through stage 24, when 
limb development is well underway. This work was carried out in 
collaboration with Ketan Patel (NIMR and UCL).
Hoxb9 expression could not be detected prior to stage 5, when it is 
initiated lateral to the posterior primitive streak (Fig. 12b). Expression then 
spreads anteriorly and by stage 8 the anterior boundary of Hoxb9 in the 
mesoderm lies within the region identified by Chaube (1959) as the 
prospective wing (Fig. 12c,d), but is more posterior than the anterior 
boundary in the neuroectoderm (Fig. 12c). The mesodermal expression 
boundary continues to co-localize with the prospective wing bud, and by 
stage 13, the segmentation of the paraxial mesoderm at wing level allows 
the use of somites as landmarks. From this stage, the anterior boundary of 
expression in lateral plate and paraxial mesoderm is at the level of the 
somite 18/19 junction (Fig. 12e). Transverse sections of embryos at stage 13 
show that Hoxb9 is expressed in both layers of the lateral plate mesoderm; 
the somatic layer that will form the limbs and body wall and the splanchnic 
layer that will form the smooth muscle of the gut. At the onset of wing 
budding at stage 16, the anterior boundary of Hoxb9 in the wing still lies 
opposite somite 18/19, and expression extends posteriorly throughout the
flank and leg bud. The anterior boundary of Hoxb9 expression in the 
paraxial mesoderm also lies at the somite 18/19, but expression in the dorsal 
root ganglia and neural tube extends much more anteriorly to the level of 
somite 9 (Fig. 12e). At stage 18, however, the anterior expression boundary 
in the somites has regressed posteriorly to somite 21, out of register with the 
lateral plate mesodermal boundary opposite somite 18/19. At around stage 
20, the anterior boundary in the lateral plate mesoderm shifts posteriorly out 
of the wing to mark the junction between the flank and posterior wing, 
opposite somites 20/21, and the wing bud no longer expresses the gene 
(Fig. 12f). The domain of high levels of Hoxb9 expression extends 
throughout the flank, with a posterior boundary of high expression marking 
the site of leg bud outgrowth, opposite somite 26 (Fig. 12a). At stage 20, the 
leg bud expresses lower levels of Hoxb9, and this pattern then resolves to 
high levels of Hoxb9 in anterior and distal leg bud by stage 21 (Fig. 12g). 
Expression in the rest of the leg bud becomes progressively weaker until it is 
undetectable in posterior and central mesenchyme at stage 24 (Fig. 12h).
2.3 Comparative analysis of HoxbS,  HoxcB and HoxdS  in 
lateral plate mesoderm
Paralogous Hox genes are known to interact to influence patterning 
in the limbs (Davis et al., 1995) and axial skeleton (Condie and Capecchi, 
1994, Horan et a/., 1995). To compare the Hoxb9 pattern with that of other 
Hox group 9 paralogs in lateral plate mesoderm, expression of Hoxc9 and 
Hoxd9  was also analyzed. Particular emphasis was placed on the 
relationship between Hox9 gene expression and the different regions of 
lateral plate mesoderm along the main body axis; prospective wing, 
prospective leg and the intervening flank. Prior to initiation of limb budding, 
at stage 14, anterior expression boundaries of Hoxb9, c9 and d-9 in lateral 
plate mesoderm are staggered within prospective wing region, and
expression is strong throughout prospective flank and leg regions (Fig. 13a-
d). When limb budding is initiated at stage 16, a secondary phase of Hox9 
gene expression along the main body axis occurs, boundaries of expression 
begin to realign and levels of expression change locally. The anterior 
boundary of Hoxd9 expression shifts anteriorly from the flank-wing junction 
to the anterior limit of the wing bud (Fig. 13e). Thus, in the secondary phase, 
the wing bud expresses Hoxd9 throughout, and Hoxb9 and Hoxc9  
posteriorly (Fig. 13f). Hoxd9 expression in the flank is subsequently 
reduced and ultimately switches off (Fig. 13i), so that by stage 18 the flank 
expresses Hoxb9 and Hoxc9, but not Hoxd9 (Fig. 11j) . Decreased levels of 
Hoxb9 expression in the leg bud, which produce the posterior boundary that 
separates strong flank expression and weaker leg expression at stage 17 
(Fig. 13g), result in a leg bud expression pattern of weak Hoxb9 with strong 
Hoxc9 and Hoxd9 (Fig. 13j). The anterior boundary of Hoxc9 expression 
follows a similar pattern to that described for Hoxb9, in that it remains at the 
same position as in the primary phase until the buds are well-developed 
(Fig. 13g,h,j). Thus, these 3 Hox genes are expressed in regionally specific 
patterns related to limb specification and budding.
2.4 Hox9 gene expression and induction of ectopic limbs
In order to determine whether respecification of flank to form limbs 
involves changes in Hox gene expression, FGF was applied to either 
anterior flank to induce additional wings or to posterior flank to induce 
additional legs and expression of Hoxb9, Hoxc9 and Hoxd9 was monitored. 
Specific changes were observed in the pattern of Hox gene expression in 
lateral plate mesoderm, according to the position at which FGF is applied. 
Changes in expression were almost always confined to boundaries; local 
patches of downregulation around the FGF bead were not detected.
FGF beads in anterior flank, which lead to ectopic wings, induced a 
posterior shift of the anterior boundaries of Hoxb9 and Hoxc9 expression 
(Fig. 14a,b,c; Table 3a). The posterior boundary of Hoxb9 expression could 
be seen, but was not affected (Fig. 14b). In contrast to the posterior shift of 
Hoxb9 and c9 anterior boundaries, the anterior boundary of Hoxd9 was 
unaffected, but Hoxd9 expression was maintained in the flank where, during 
normal development, it would have been switched off (Fig. 14d). Thus, the 
combination of Hox genes expressed in the flank after anterior FGF 
application is transformed from the normal flank pattern to a pattern normally 
found at wing level (Fig. 14e).
FGF beads in posterior flank, which lead to ectopic legs (Table 1), 
induced an anterior shift of the posterior boundary of the Hoxb9 domain (Fig. 
14g; Table 3a), stronger Hoxc9 expression in the flank (Fig. 14h) and Hoxd9 
expression was again maintained in the flank (Fig. 14i); anterior boundaries 
of Hoxb9 and Hoxc9 were unaffected. These changes transformed the 
normal flank pattern of Hox gene expression to a pattern normally found at 
leg level (Fig. 14j).
FGF applied to mid-flank, opposite s22-24, which results in either 
wing or leg development, induced shifts of both boundaries of Hoxb9, 
sometimes in the same embryo (Table 3a,b). FGF beads placed at any 
position within the flank occasionally induced single lateral outgrowths 
extending from anterior wing to the posterior limit of the flank (n=8), which 
were associated with posterior shifts in the Hoxb9 anterior boundary (Table 
Changes in the primary pattern of Hox gene expression were detected as 
early as 12 hours after FGF application, when the anterior boundary of
Hoxb9 had shifted posteriorly in the lateral plate mesoderm over a distance 
of one somite (Table 3a). Activation of expression of genes that encode 
signaling molecules which control outgrowth and patterning occurs later in 
ectopic buds. Ectopic Fgf-8 transcripts are first detectable in flank ectoderm 
14-16 hours after FGF application (Crossley et ai, 1996). and ectopic Shh is 
first expressed in flank mesenchyme at 24 hours (Cohn at al. 1995) . Two to 
3 days after application of FGF, ectopic limb buds show specific changes in 
the complex patterns of Hox gene expression characteristic of normal wings 
(e.g., downregulation of Hoxb9; Fig. 14a) or legs (e.g., asymmetric 
downregulation of Hoxb9\ Fig. 14f; Table 3b), indicating that a cascade of 
gene expression characteristic of either wing or leg has been set in train in 
flank cells (see below).
Figure 12 Hoxb9 expression during normal chick development.
Hoxb9 transcripts were detected by whole-mount in situ hybridization. All 
embryos are oriented with anterior at top and are dorsal views, 
a Stage 20 chick embryo. Hoxb9 expression can be detected in the somites 
as far anterior as somite 21. High levels of expression exist in the lateral 
plate mesoderm of the flank between the posterior wing bud opposite somite 
20 and the anterior leg bud opposite somite 26. The dotted line marks the 
boundary between different levels of transcripts in the flank and leg bud. 
Hoxb9 is also expressed in the neural tube and dorsal root ganglia, 
b Transcripts are first detectable at stage 5. Arrowhead marks anterior limit 
of expression lateral to posterior primitive streak.
c, d. Stage 8 embryos. Anterior boundary in mesoderm (M, arrow) in c 
appears to mark the region identified as prospective wing in d (after Fig. 3 of 
Chaube, 1959). c Hoxb9 expression extends further anteriorly in the 
neuroectoderm (N, arrowhead) than in the mesoderm, 
e Stage 15 embryo. Hoxb9 is expressed in lateral plate and somitic 
mesoderm posterior to somite 18, and in the neural tube posterior to 
somite 9.
f Stage 18 (left), 20+ (middle), and 24 (right) embryos. At stage 18 , the 
anterior boundary (arrows) of Hoxb9 expression in the lateral plate 
mesoderm is in the posterior wing bud opposite somites 18/19. At stage 20+, 
the anterior boundary shifts posteriorly out of the wing and comes to mark 
the junction between the posterior wing bud and the flank. The position of 
the anterior boundary (note arrow on stage 24 embryo) remains at the flank- 
wing junction through late limb stages.
g Stage 21 leg bud. Levels of Hoxb9 expression in the leg are no longer 
uniform as expression in the central and posterior mesenchyme weakens, 
h By stage 24, Hoxb9 is no longer expressed in the central-posterior leg 
bud, but high levels of expression can be seen anteriorly and distally.
1 1 2
  i     Wing
F ank
Figure 13. Expression of Hox group 9 paralogues in lateral plate 
mesoderm of normal chick embryos
Hoxb9 (a, g), Hoxc9 (b ,h) and Hoxd9 (c,e , i) transcripts detected by 
whole-mount in situ hybridization. Embryos are oriented with anterior at top 
and are dorsal views, except e, which is a ventrolateral view. Black lines 
mark boundaries of expression domains in lateral plate mesoderm of normal 
embryos; arrows mark boundaries on FGF-treated side and arrowheads are 
on the contralateral (untreated side) of embryos.
a-c. Pre-limb bud stage chick embryos (stage 14-15). a. Anterior boundary 
of Hoxb9 expression in lateral plate mesoderm lies opposite the junction 
between s i8 and 19. b. Anterior boundary of Hoxc9 in lateral plate 
mesoderm lies opposite si 9. c. Anterior boundary of Hoxd9 in lateral plate 
mesoderm lies opposite s20-21. These patterns are summarized in panel d, 
in which the staggering of the boundaries in the prospective wing region is 
shown. 0. Stage 16 embryo in which limb budding has been initiated and 
the anterior boundary of Hoxd9 has shifted anteriorly from s20-21 to si 5 at 
the anterior margin of the emerging wing bud. f. Schematic illustration 
summarizing Hoxb9, c9 and d9 expression at stage 16. g Stage 18 and (h) 
stage 19 chick embryos. The anterior boundaries of Hoxb9 (g) and Hoxc9 
(h) are still at the same axial level as shown in a and b In g, a clear 
posterior boundary of Hoxb9 expression has appeared opposite s26 
between the strong flank expression and the weaker leg expression, but no 
such change is seen in Hoxc9 (h), which is uniformly expressed in flank and 
leg. i. Stage 17-18 embryo. Hoxd9 is now clearly downregulated in the 
flank between the wing and leg buds (arrows), j. Summary of Hoxb9, 
Hoxc9 and Hoxd9 expression at stage 19. Dark and light purple represent 
intensity of Hoxb9 expression.
6P 60 eqxoH
6P 60 eqxoH
6P 60 6qxoH
6PXOH 60XOH 6QXOH
Figure 14 Expression of Hox group 9 paralogues in chick 
embryos treated with FGF to induce ectopic limbs.
a 57 hours after application of the FGF bead opposite s23, the posteriorly 
displaced anterior (ant.) boundary of Hoxb9 expression lies at the junction between 
the ectopic limb bud and the remaining flank (arrow), creating a wing-like pattern in 
the flank. The boundary of expression on the contralateral side marks the junction 
between the normal wing bud and ant. flank (arrowhead), b. Chick embryo 26 
hours after implantation of a FGF bead in the lateral plate mesoderm opposite s23. 
The ant. boundary of HoxbQ expression in the lateral plate mesoderm is shifted 
posteriorly (arrow) compared to the boundary on the contralateral side 
(arrowhead), which is unaffected. The posterior (post.) expression boundary in the 
lateral plate mesoderm and expression in the somites are unaffected, c, d. Chick 
embryos 18 hours after application of FGF opposite s21. c. The ant. boundary of 
Hoxc9 has shifted posteriorly over a distance of 3 somites (arrow). Compare with 
contralateral side, where ant. expression boundary lies at the post, edge of the 
emerging wing bud (arrowhead), d. The ant. boundary of Hoxd9 remains at the ant. 
limit of the wing bud, but the domain is posteriorly extended into the flank (arrow), 
whereas on the left side (arrowhead) Hoxd9 has been switched off. Note that on 
the treated (right) side, although the ant. boundary is at the appropriate axial level, 
the expression in the wing is patchy. By this stage, expression in the leg buds has 
started to weaken, e. Schematic diagram summarizing the patterns of Hoxb9 ,c9 
and d9 expression in the flank when it is anteriorized by FGF to take on a wing 
identity, f. 72 hours after application of a FGF bead opposite s24, the post, 
boundary of Hoxb9 expression is no longer visible, as expression in the ectopic 
bud has taken on a leg-like pattern. Hoxb9 has been downregulated at the ant. 
margin of the ectopic bud (*), reproducing the pattern of the normal leg but with a 
reversed antero-posterior pattern, g 17 hours after application of a FGF bead 
opposite s22, the posterior boundary of Hoxb9 expression in the lateral plate 
mesoderm on the treated side has shifted anteriorly (arrow). Expression in the 
somites and the boundary on the contralateral side (arrowhead) are unaffected, h. 
19 hours after application of FGF opposite s25, the boundaries of Hoxc9  
expression are unaffected. Hoxc9 expression is increased in the flank around the 
bead (* and arrow), i 18 hours after application of FGF opposite s25, Hoxd9 
expression has been extended throughout the entire flank (arrow), j. Schematic 
diagram summarizing the patterns of Hoxb9, c9 and d9 expression in the flank 
when the flank is posteriorized by FGF to take on a leg identity.
HoxbQ HoxbQ HoxcQ HoxdQ
Hoxb9 c9 d9
2.5 Application of FGF to paraxial mesoderm
Hoxb9, c-9 and d-9 have different expression boundaries in neural 
tube, paraxial mesoderm and lateral plate mesoderm. Boundaries of 
expression in paraxial mesoderm, like lateral plate mesoderm, are dynamic, 
whereas in neural tube, anterior expression boundaries of Hoxb9 and d-9 
appear to be fixed early and are generally maintained. FGF application to 
the flank alters Hoxb9 ,c9 and d9 boundaries only in lateral plate mesoderm; 
expression boundaries in somites and neural tube were unchanged (Fig. 
14a-d and f-i). This is consistent with the observation that vertebral identity is 
not altered in embryos which develop ectopic limbs (Chapter 3). These 
results demonstrate that Hox gene expression in lateral plate and paraxial 
mesoderm can be regulated independently. As reported in Chapter 3, Dig- 
FGF2 does not appear to diffuse far from the bead, therefore the failure of 
paraxial mesoderm to respond to FGF treatment of the lateral plate could be 
due to distance from the FGF source. Alternatively, Hox gene expression in 
paraxial mesoderm may not respond to FGF. To explore these possibilities, 
FGF2-soaked beads were placed directly in the paraxial mesoderm of stage 
13-16 chick embryos, and embryos were examined 24-48 hours later. 
Application of FGF to the paraxial mesoderm resulted in formation of ectopic 
limb buds from the flank, and although the anterior boundary of Hoxb9 in 
lateral plate mesoderm was shifted posteriorly in all cases, H oxb9  
expression in paraxial mesoderm was not affected (n=4. Fig. 15). These 
results indicate that Hoxb9 expression in paraxial mesoderm is not sensitive 
to FGF at stages when expression in lateral plate can be altered.
Figure 15. Hoxb9  expression in chick embryo 48 hours after 
application of FGF to paraxial mesoderm
FGF bead was implanted in somite (s)23. Hoxb9 expression in the somites 
appears normal, but the anterior boundary of expression in the lateral plate 
mesoderm (LPM) has shifted posteriorly from somite 21 to somite 23 (arrow).
Table 3 Effects of FGF on Hox gene expression in lateral plate mesoderm of the chick 
A. Pattern of Hoxb9 expression between 12 and 24 hours after application of FGF to the flank
Axial level of 
FGF bead
Number of 
embryos 
assayed
Anterior
boundary
shifted
Posterior
boundary
shifted
boundaries
shifted
Boundaries
Unchanged
Somite 21 6 3 0 0 3**
Somite 22 3 0 1 0 2
Somite 23 6 3 1 0 2*
Somite 24 1 0 0 1 0
Somite 25 3 0 3 0 0
B. Pattern of Hoxb9 exnression between 25-75 hours after aoolication of FGF to the flank
Axial level of 
FGF bead
Number of 
embryos 
assayed
"Anteriorized
Wing-like
expression
pattern
" "Posteriorized" 
Leg-like 
expression pattern
Expression 
pattern altered
Pattern
Unchanged
Somite 21 9 7(1^) 1 0 0
Somite 22 9 3 6 0 0
Somite 23 8 2(2^) 1 2 1
Somite 24 9 0(2^) 5 1 1
Somite 25 11 2(3^) 6 0 0
* Upregulation within expression domain (* = 1 case).
t  Fin-like outgrowth extending from anterior limit of wing to anterior limit of leg. 
 Expression domain altered but without clear resemblance to wing or leg pattern.
2.6 Effects of retinoic acid on Hoxb9 expression at wing level
The anterior expression boundary of HoxbQ lies approximately at the 
same axial level as the anterior limit of polarizing potential in lateral plate 
mesoderm during limb initiation (This chapter and Hornbruch and Wolpert,
1991). Retinoic acid can activate the polarizing region pathway and 
expression of HoxbS in anterior limb bud mesenchyme (Lu et a/., 1997; 
Stratford et al., 1997). To test whether retinoic acid can activate HoxbQ 
expression, beads soaked in 0.1 mg/ml retinoic acid were applied to the 
anterior margin of stage 19 and 20 wing buds. There was no detectable 
induction of HoxbQ at 9 hours (n=2) or at 22 hours (n=2) after retinoic acid 
application, although the normal posterior domain of HoxbQ was present. A 
control embryo which was treated the same way and left to develop to 10 
days had a 43234 pattern of digit duplication. A higher dose of retinoic acid 
applied at an earlier stage of development also did not induce HoxbQ 
expression. Beads soaked in a 1 mg/ml solution of retinoic acid were applied 
to the anterior margin of stage 17-18 wing buds, when Hoxb9 expression is 
present in the posterior wing, and the embryos were assayed between 5 and 
24 hours. No ectopic HoxbQ could be detected in embryos examined at 5 
hours (n=2), 16 hours (n=2), or 24 hours (n=1), and control embryos had 
4334 and 43234 digit duplication patterns. These results suggest that 
HoxbQ expression in the wing is neither induced by retinoic acid nor 
required for induction of polarizing activity.
2.7 HoxbQ boundaries and cell lineage in the wing bud
A striking change in HoxbQ expression occurs in the posterior of the 
wing bud between stages 20 and 21. Up to stage 20, Hoxb9 is expressed 
posteriorly in the wing bud, with an anterior boundary opposite somite 18/19. 
One stage later, however, HoxbQ is no longer expressed in the wing, but is 
still expressed in the flank, with an anterior boundary at the flank-wing
junction. The posterior shift of the Hoxb9 anterior boundary from the wing 
bud to the flank could be due either to cell movement or to cells in the wing 
bud switching off expression of the gene. To test these two possibilities, 
cells in the posterior wing opposite somites 18-20, where Hoxb9 is 
expressed (see Fig. 12), were labelled with the fluorescent lipophilic 
membrane dye Dil between stages 16 and 19 (Fig. 16a), and the embryos 
were allowed to develop beyond the time at which the boundary shift occurs. 
The position of fluorescent cells was recorded and then whole mount in situ 
hybridization was performed on the same specimens to determine whether 
labelled cells expressed Hoxb9. In all cases, fluorescent cells remained in 
the wing, the original spot of labelled cells had expanded into a streak along 
the proximodistal (p-d) axis of the wing (Fig. 16b), and none of these cells 
expressed Hoxb9 (Fig. 16c, n=9). This indicates that the posterior shift in the 
anterior Hoxb9 expression boundary during normal wing development is 
due to cells in the wing switching off Hoxb9 expression.
Figure 16. Analysis of cell lineage and Hoxb9 expression in the 
posterior wing bud.
Dorsal views, anterior at top.
a Cells in the Hoxb9 domain of the posterior wing bud, opposite somite 19, 
of a stage 16 chick embryo were labelled with Dil. Double exposure 
photomicrograph using fluorescence and lightfield was taken at time of 
injection.
b Forty-eight hours after injection, fluorescent cells have remained in the 
wing bud, which is now at stage 24, and are distributed in a stripe along the 
p-d axis.
0  Embryo shown in b after whole-mount \n situ hybridization for the HoxbQ 
gene. Cells in the wing no longer express Hoxb9.
1 2 4
2.8 Loss of Hoxb9 expression in posterior limb buds
In section 2.2, I showed that HoxbQ is initially expressed in the 
posterior wing bud and throughout the leg bud, and expression later 
disappears from the posterior region of both limbs. Why does Hoxb9 switch 
off in posterior wing and leg, but remain on in the flank and anterior leg? 
The posterior part of the buds, in which Hoxb9 expression is downregulated 
during outgrowth, is a source of several secreted factors (SHH, BMP2, 
FGF4), and reduction of Hoxb9 expression occurs after these signaling 
molecules begin to be expressed. These factors are not expressed in the 
flank, where Hoxb9 expression is maintained. Retinoic acid and SHH are 
known to regulate Hox gene expression (Izpisua-Belmonte et al., 1991, 
Riddle at al., 1993), and both signals are present in the posterior wing and 
leg. Therefore, the possibility that these signals may switch off Hoxb9 was 
investigated by directly exposing limb bud cells to retinoic acid and SHH. 
When retinoic acid (0.1 mg/ml) was applied to the anterior margin of the leg 
bud at stage 20, expression of Hoxb9 was either switched off or severely 
reduced in all cases (n=3. Fig. 17a). Application of mSHH198 (16 mg/ml) to 
the anterior leg also reduced Hoxb9 expression (n=2. Fig. 17b). Application 
of SHH to Hoxb9-express\ng regions of the flank at stage 14 (n=3) and to the 
neural tube at stage 20 (n=1) had no effect on Hoxb9 expression 24 hours 
after application. These results indicate that both SHH and retinoic acid can 
reduce Hoxb9 expression in the limb, but that the sensitivity of Hoxb9 
expression to these factors appears to be restricted to limb buds.
To determine whether exposure of Hoxb9-express\ng flank cells to 
endogenous cues in the posterior limb bud could affect Hoxb9 expression, 
flank tissue opposite somites 21-24, in which Hoxb9 is continuously 
expressed (Fig. 12), was transplanted from stage 14 (n=2) or stage 18 (n=4) 
donors to the posterior wing bud of stage 19-20 hosts. The embryos were
allowed to develop for 24 to 48 hours after grafting, well beyond the stage 
when HoxbQ should be switched off in wing cells, before being fixed and 
assayed for Hoxb9 expression. In all cases, Hoxb9 transcripts were 
detected in the grafted flank cells but not in the surrounding wing tissue (Fig. 
17c). When flank cells opposite somite 21 were transplanted to the anterior 
wing, expression was again detected in the graft in all cases (n=3; Fig. 17d). 
Thus, in contrast to limb bud cells, flank cells stably express Hoxb9 and are 
unresponsive to direct application of SHH or to exposure to factors present 
in posterior limb buds.
Figure 17. Regulation of Hoxb9 in the chick leg bud and flank
a. HoxbQ expression in the leg bud of a chick embryo 24 hours after 
application of a retinoic acid (0.1 mg/ml) bead to the anterior margin of the 
bud. b. HoxbQ expression in the leg bud of a chick embryo 24 hours after 
application of a SHH (16 mg/ml) bead to the anterior margin of the bud. c, 
d. HoxbQ expression in wing buds after transplantation of flank cells to the 
anterior (c) or posterior (d) margin of the wing. c. Flank cells from opposite 
somite 22 were transplanted to the posterior margin of the chick wing and 
assayed after 24 hours for HoxbQ expression. Note that expression persists 
in the grafted flank cells but has disappeared from surrounding posterior 
wing cells, d. Flank cells from opposite somite 21 were transplanted to the 
anterior margin of the chick wing and assayed after 24 hours for HoxbQ 
expression. Strong HoxbQ expression is detected in the grafted flank cells.
3. Discussion
3.1 Hox gene expression specifies limb position
The results reported in this chapter are consistent with the idea that 
early primary expression of Hox genes in lateral plate mesoderm along the 
body axis specifies positions where limbs develop. Further evidence for this 
role for Hox genes comes from mice lacking Hoxb5, in which forelimb 
position is altered (Rancourt et al. 1995). The anterior boundaries of Hox 
group 9 paralogues overlap in the region where the wing will form. 
Staggered boundaries of Hox gene expression are known to be important 
for specifying positional differences along the body axis, as in the distinct 
segment types in insects (Akam et a., 1994), the chordate neural tube 
(Lumsden and Krumlauf, 1996) and the vertebrate axial skeleton (Krumlauf,
1994). FGF resets Hox expression boundaries in lateral plate mesoderm so 
that they come to lie in the flank. According to the new pattern of Hox gene 
expression, the same population of flank cells then forms either an additional 
wing or leg. The fact that an additional limb forms, rather than a shift in 
position of the nearby normal limb, suggests that position of the normal limb 
has already been specified by a ratchet-like mechanism which irreversibly 
commits cells. The cascade of gene expression set in train as a result could 
include the recently identified T-box genes, which are differentially 
expressed in forelimbs and hindlimbs and thus are candidates for specifying 
limb identity (Gibson-Brown et a., 1996).
The observation that Hox gene expression is altered prior to activation 
of Fgf-8 and Shh is reminiscent of the changes in gene expression that 
enable butterfly prolegs to develop in abdominal segments, when 
downregulation of Ubx and abd-a precedes activation of Antennapedia 
(Antp) and Distal-less (Dll) in the prospective limbs (Warren et al., 1994). It 
may necessary to locally change the identity of cells from abdomen to thorax
first, so that leg-specific genes will operate in a thoracic context of Hox gene 
expression. This may also explain why in the chick, SHH fails to induce 
limb development in the flank when it can initiate ectopic transcription of 
Fgf8. Given the inability of SHH to alter Hoxb9 expression in the flank, Fgf8 
is activated in a flank rather than a limb context of Hox gene expression.
3.2 The polarizing region pathway is independent of Hoxb9
Although positional identity and Hox gene expression is reset in the 
flank so that an additional limb forms, ectopic limbs have reversed polarity 
and Shh is expressed at the anterior of the ectopic buds (Chapter 3). Thus it 
appears that polarizing potential in the flank is not reset. Retinoic acid does 
not induce ectopic HoxbQ when applied to the anterior of the wing bud. This 
important difference between Hoxb9 and HoxbS suggests that Hoxb9 is not 
involved in specification of the polarizing region. The possibility that HoxbQ 
may lie upstream of retinoic acid during normal limb development, however, 
can not be excluded by these experiments. If the latter suggestion is correct 
and HoxbQ is involved in positioning the polarizing region, then this 
information must be irreversibly specified when HoxbQ reaches the definitive 
anterior boundary, as movement of this boundary by FGF does not reset the 
gradient of polarizing potential.
3.3 HoxbQ expression is reduced by local signals in the limb 
During later stages of limb development, lineage tracing indicates that 
the pattern of HoxbQ expression changes because cells in the posterior wing 
switch off the gene. Direct application of both SHH and retinoic acid to the 
anterior leg bud causes reduction in the level of HoxbQ expression, which 
suggests that these signals may play a role in the regulation of expression in
the leg. This finding may also explain the loss of HoxbQ expression from the 
posterior wing, if HoxbQ expression in the wing is also sensitive to retinoic 
acid and SHH. The differential response of HoxbQ in flank and limb cells 
exposed to SHH suggests that Hox gene expression in flank and limb are 
under different regulatory control. The position-specific changes in HoxbQ 
expression observed in ectopic limb buds induced by FGF suggests that 
these differences are eliminated and flank cells can respond to SHH after 
their positional identity is reprogramed from flank to limb. Differential 
regulation of Hox genes in flank and limb may underlie the stability of normal 
limb position and identity when the flank is transformed by FGF.
3.4 Hox genes and the evolution of paired appendages
In light of these results, new pathways for paired fin and limb 
developmental evolution can be considered. Hox gene expression 
dynamics, the independence of Hox gene regulation in paraxial and lateral 
plate mesoderm, and the fact that morphological transformations can occur 
in one tissue without altering the other, raise the following possibilities: (a) 
that paired appendage evolution included a mechanism which staggered 
Hox gene expression along the lateral plate mesoderm. This is likely to 
have been achieved by modifying genes which regulate Hox gene 
expression, rather than the Hox genes themselves; and (b) that paired 
appendages originated without an obligatory reorganisation of the axial 
skeleton. Modular control of Hox genes, perhaps by tissue-specific 
regulatory genes, would enable decoupling of anatomical systems and 
freedom for variation to occur without inducing wholesale body plan 
transformations. This model can account for the idea that paired fins appear 
to have evolved before a regionalized axial skeleton (Carroll, 1988). 
Independent regulation of Hox gene expression would also allow the 
position of paired appendages to shift along the body axis without dramatic
reorganization of the axial skeleton (See Agar, 1907, Goodrich, 1930, 
Thorogood and Ferretti, 1993).
Prior to the evolutionary origin of vertebrates, Hox gene expression 
was central to regional specialization of the gut (Bienz, 1994, Roberts et al., 
1995). Hox gene expression is staggered in the tetrapod splanchnic 
mesoderm and is important for regional patterning of the developing gut 
(Boulet and Capecchi, 1996). Given that somatic and splanchnic mesoderm 
are both derived from lateral plate, one possibility is that staggered Hox 
boundaries in lateral plate mesoderm appeared concomitantly with gut 
regionalization. Molecular regionalization of the body wall would therefore 
have provided differential positional values along the body axis before 
evolutionary emergence of paired fins. Differential Hox expression could 
have allowed spatially restricted activation of outgrowth signals such as FGF 
(Care et a/., 1996), and the resultant fins would have inherent differences in 
their positional identity at different loci along the body axis. The same 
signaling molecules could therefore operate in different contexts in anterior 
and posterior appendages, and the resultant differences in signal 
interpretation during development may explain morphological differences 
between anterior and posterior appendages. This is consistent with 
evidence from the fossil record which indicates that evolution of a stomach 
and pectoral fins was coordinated, and that pelvic and pectoral appendages 
evolved as morphologically distinct structures (Coates, 1994).
C H A PTER  FIVE: D eve lopm enta l A nalys is  of
Limblessness and Axial Patterning in Python Embryos
1. Background
Development of forelimbs and hindlimbs can be induced in chick 
embryos by FGFs, and the identity of the limb is related to particular 
combinations of Hox gene expression in the lateral plate mesoderm along 
the main body axis (Chapters 3 and 4). In snakes, forelimbs and hindlimbs 
fail to develop and regional specialization of the axial skeleton has been 
lost, but the developmental basis for these changes is unknown. This 
chapter aims to investigate the changes that have occurred during evolution 
of snake development.
Number, pattern and identity of elements within the vertebral column 
can vary widely across vertebrates. A clear pattern of regionalization is 
usually evident, in particular among tetrapods (Gadow, 1933, Romer, 1966). 
In limbed reptiles, the pattern of vertebral identity is generally cervical 
vertebrae at the anterior, followed by dorsal (in higher vertebrates 
subdivided into rib-bearing thoracic and rib-less lumbar), sacral and caudal 
(Romer, 1956). Although dorsal vertebrae is the formal name for the 
vertebrae between the cervical and sacral series, to avoid confusing 
terminology, I will refer to dorsal vertebrae as thoracic in this thesis. Snakes 
have between 160 and 400 individual vertebrae, depending on the species, 
and classification of vertebral type other than "precaudal" versus "caudal" 
has proved to be a difficult and subjective task because of their apparent 
uniformity (Bellairs, 1969, Gadow, 1933, Gasc, 1976).
Hox genes are expressed in paraxial mesoderm of vertebrates with 
specific boundaries corresponding to morphological transitions (e.g., Hoxc6 
at the thoracic-cervical junction in frogs, chicks and mice) (Burke et al., 1995,
Oliver et al., 1988a). The pattern of Hox gene expression across vertebrates 
with different vertebral formulae correlates with morphological identity of the 
vertebrae rather than with vertebral number (Gaunt, 1994; Burke at a.,
1995). Gain and loss of function mutations often result in homeotic 
transformations, in which one type of vertebra is transformed into another. 
Hoxc6 and Hoxc8 are expressed in restricted domains corresponding to the 
thoracic region of the vertebral column in frogs, chicks and mice 
(Awgulewitsch and Jacobs, 1990, Jegalian and De Robertis, 1992, Kessel, 
1992, Oliver at a/., 1988a). Overexpression of Hoxc6 and Hoxc8 each result 
in anterior transformation of lumbar vertebrae to rib-bearing thoracic 
vertebrae (Jegalian and De Robertis, 1992, Pollock, Jay, and Bieberich,
1992). Hoxb5 is expressed in paraxial mesoderm with an anterior boundary 
at the first cervical vertebra (Wall at a/., 1992). Loss of function mutation in 
the Hoxb gene causes anterior transformation of thoracic 1 to cervical 6 
(Rancourt at a., 1995).
The signaling molecules that maintain outgrowth and patterning of the 
limbs after limb initiation in mice and chicks are common to forelimbs and 
hindlimbs, and the structures that they specify are determined by the context 
of gene expression in which they operate. The common mechanisms of 
forelimb and hindlimb development are reflected by several mutations which 
effect development of both limbs (e.g.. Extra toas, Laglass and Strongs 
Luxoid) (Chan at a/., 1995, Masuya at al., 1997, Singh at al., 1991). A 
number of mutations, however, effect only forelimbs (e.g., Wingless, TBX3 
/ulnar-mammary syndrome and TBX5 /Holt-Oram syndrome), or only 
hindlimbs (e.g., Rim4), which indicates a level of independence in forelimb 
and hindlimb development (Bamshad at al., 1997, Li at al., 1997, Masuya at 
al., 1995, Zwilling, 1956b). The ability of forelimbs and hindlimbs to undergo 
morphological changes without affecting one another has allowed
vertebrates to evolve specializations restricted to one set of limbs.
Modularity during limb development has allowed some vertebrates to 
lose one set of limbs, as whales have done with hindlimbs and several 
Australian skinks have done with forelimbs (Greer, 1989). Complete loss of 
limbs may be caused by failure to initiate limb budding, and this could be 
related to higher-order changes in the primary body axis, such as loss of 
regional specialization which may eliminate localized inductive interactions 
at forelimb and/or hindlimb levels. This hypothesis is supported by the 
observation that limblessness is often associated with elongation of the body 
and loss of clear regionalization of the axial skeleton in the region of the lost 
limb. Most modern snakes have lost both fore and hindlimbs, and 
determination of regional identity of the vertebrae is difficult (Romer, 1956). 
Pythons and boas have retained vestiges of hindlimbs, however, suggesting 
that limb budding is initiated posteriorly but the cellular interactions within 
the bud have been disrupted. Anteriorly, however, the limb initiation signal 
appears to have been lost. To understand the developmental basis of the 
changes that have occurred during evolution of the snake body plan, 
expression of Hox genes, FGF and several transcription factors involved in 
chick and mouse limb development was studied in embryonic pythons.
2. Results
Most of the results described in this chapter come from work done on 
Burmese and Indian pythons. Python molurus molurus and Python molurus 
bivittatus. Duration of development is fairly uniform within the species; eggs 
are laid two months after mating, and they hatch after another two months 
(Ross, 1990). A few specimens of spotted python were used for analysis of 
skeletal development and scanning electron microscopy. Although the 
taxonomic classification of the spotted python has not yet been resolved
(either Python antaresia maculosa or Liasis maculosa), the skeletal 
morphology of the limbs is indistinguishable from the Molurus group. All 
results in this chapter refer to Python molurus unless otherwise specified.
2.1 Segmental identity in the python axial skeleton
Pythons have over 300 vertebrae (Fig. 18a), and ribs are present on 
every segment with the exceptions of the atlas and the caudal vertebrae of 
the tail (Fig. 18b, d). The morphology of the ribs is approximately uniform 
between the atlas and the leg/cloacal level, where the ribs abruptly change 
from long movable structures, to short, forked ribs (lymphapophyses) which 
are fused to the vertebrae (Fig. 18c). These lymphapophyses contain dorsal 
and ventral processes which protect the lymph hearts. The transitional 
vertebra between the free ribs and the lymphapophyses may represent the 
vestige of a sacral vertebra (Fig. 18d; Gadow, 1933), although a distinct 
sacral vertebra is not present (Romer, 1956). Posterior to the forked 
lymphapophyses-bearing series, the vertebrae lack true ribs but have short 
transverse processes, and are typically referred to as the caudal or tail 
vertebrae (Fig. 18d). Presence of ribs on all vertebrae anterior to the caudal 
series suggests that snakes may have undergone anterior and posterior 
expansion of thoracic identity along the axial skeleton, resulting in what 
appear to be serial homologues, but are actually secondarily similar 
structures. The anterior vertebrae do not show any clear transition in 
regional identity which, in other vertebrates, would indicate forelimb position.
The relationship between Hox gene expression and segmental 
identity was investigated in the snake axial skeleton in order to determine 
whether these morphological changes are associated with altered patterns 
of Hox gene expression. Whole-mount antibody staining of Python molurus 
embryos at 1 day of incubation was performed with antibodies against
H0XC6, H0XC8 and H0XB5 (Oliver et al., 1988a, Oliver at al., 1988b, 
Shashikant at al., 1995, Wall at al., 1992). The restricted transverse band of 
H0XC8 expression seen in the chick thorax (Fig. 19a, b), was not seen in the 
python, but instead H0XC8 expression was found to extend posteriorly from 
the anterior limit of the vertebral column (Fig. 19e) throughout the trunk (Fig. 
19f). A precise posterior limit of expression can not be determined, but 
H0XC8 is expressed throughout the lymphapophysis-bearing vertebrae and 
expression fades posterior to the leg bud in the tail. H0XC6 and H0XB5 
expression was examined in the trunks of embryos which had the limbs and 
head removed for other experiments. H0XC6 expression was detected in a 
segmental pattern in somites along the entire trunk (Fig. 19g), which 
contrasts with the restricted thoracic pattern of expression seen in the chick 
embryo, where the anterior boundary of expression marks the level of the 
forelimb (Fig. 19c). H0XB5 is expressed in the somites and dorsal root 
ganglia along the entire trunk (Fig. 19h), which is similar to the expression 
pattern seen in the chick (Fig. 19d) and mouse (Wall at al., 1992). Thus, both 
H0XC6 and H0XC8, which are expressed exclusively in the thoracic region 
of the chick axial skeleton, are expressed throughout the python trunk. 
H0XB5, which is expressed up to a cervical level in chicks, is also 
expressed throughout the python axial skeleton. Expansion of rib-bearing 
vertebrae along the python body axis is tightly correlated with expansion of 
Hox gene expression domains characteristic of thoracic identity.
Figure 18. Morphological pattern in the python axial skeleton
Alcian blue and Alizarin red stained skeletal preparation of a spotted python 
embryo at 24 days of incubation. Hindlimb vestiges have been removed to 
improve visibility of the vertebrae. Anterior is to the left in b-d. 
a. Lateral view of complete skeleton, b. High power ventral view of the 
anterior axial skeleton and base of skull. Note the absence of ribs on the 
atlas (at). White arrowhead indicates hypapophysis extending ventrally from 
vertebral body. c. Lateral view of posterior axial skeleton. Arrows indicate 
lymphapophyses in cloacal region. Note the morphology of the rib on the 
transitional vertebra (t) that separates the vertebrae with large, movable ribs 
(left) and the lymphapophyses-bearing vertebrae (right), d. Dorsal view of 
posterior axial skeleton, showing clear morphological regionalization, d = 
thoracic/"dorsal" vertebrae, t = transitional vertebra, arrows = 
lymphapophyses-bearing vertebrae, and c = caudal vertebrae.
- , ,  . \ > ' '
.  V -
Figure 19. Comparative Hox  gene expression in python and 
chick embryos.
Whole mount antibody staining to show Hox gene expression patterns in 
stage 25 chick embryos and Python molurus embryos at 1 day of incubation. 
Anterior is at the top in a-e and g, left in f, and right in h a. Skeletal 
preparation of a 10 day chick embryo to show the pattern of regionalization 
of the axial skeleton and position of the limbs, b-d. Expression of H0XC8 
(b), H0XC6 (c) and H0XB5 (d) in stage 25 chick embryos. Arrows indicate 
anterior and posterior expression boundaries, e. Lateral view of anterior 
trunk and head of python embryo stained with H0XC8 antibody. Note 
expression extends to the anterior limit of the axial skeleton (arrow), f. Low 
power view of the embryo shown in panel e. Expression of H0XC8 is 
detected posterior to the anterior boundary, extending throughout the entire 
trunk and posterior to the leg bud (arrow with *). Expression fades in the tail, 
g. H0XC6 expression in a python embryo. Expression is detected 
throughout the entire trunk posterior to the head (head removed from this 
specimen), in a similar pattern to H0XC8. h. H0XB5 expression in a 
python embryo. H0XB5 expression is detected throughout the python trunk.
H0XC8 H0XB5
HOXC8
HOXC6 H0XB5
2.2 Morphology of python limbs
Mature pythons and boas possess paired "spurs", which are vestiges 
of the hindlimbs, situated ventrally on either side of the cloaca (Fig. 20a) 
(Bellairs, 1969, Raynaud, 1985) By 14 days of incubation, the skeleton of 
the Burmese python has formed in cartilage and can be visualized by 
staining with Alcian green. At this stage of development, all 3 elements of 
the pelvic girdle and the femur are visible (Fig. 20b At 35 days of 
incubation, limb morphology has not changed significantly, although the 
terminal claw is visible and the pubis is considerably longer than the other 
elements (Fig. 20^). The limb is positioned along the body axis at the 
transition between rib-bearing thoracic vertebrae and lymphapophysis- 
bearing vertebrae, one of the only distinguishable morphological transitions 
in the axial skeleton (Fig. 20^, g, and see below). Interestingly, the 
dorsoventral position of the limb corresponds to the junction between dorsal 
body scale buds and wider ventral (belly) scale buds (Fig. 20f). There is no 
sign of forelimb buds, nor is there any evidence of cartilaginous limb 
rudiments anteriorly in the trunk.
Figure 20. Morphological pattern in python limbs
Anterior is to the right in all panels except c, where anterior is to the left, 
a Ventral view of a spotted python embryo at 24 days of incubation. The left 
hindlimb vestige (arrow) is visible at the level of the cloaca (c) and paired 
genital tubercles (g). b. Ventral view of a Burmese python embryo at 14 
days of incubation stained with Alcian green to reveal the skeletal pattern. 
The pelvis is visible within the body wall and the short femora can be seen 
protruding from the body wall. c. Skeletal preparation of the hindlimb and 
associated pelvis dissected from the embryo shown in b. The femur and all 
three elements of the pelvic girdle are present (pubis, ilium and ischium), 
d. Skeletal preparation showing the cloacal region of a spotted python 
embryo at 24 days of incubation. Arrow indicates the position of the hindlimb 
relative to the axial skeleton, e. Skeletal preparation of the embryo shown 
in a. Note the presence of a terminal claw distal to the femur, f. Scanning 
electron micrograph of spotted python embryo at 24 days of incubation. 
Note the hindlimb is positioned at the junction between the morphologically 
distinct dorsal scales (d) and ventral belly scales (v).
1 4  4
Pubis
Ilium
Femur
Ischium
2.3 Early development of the python hindlimb bud
The presence of a complete pelvic girdle and a truncated femur in the 
Burmese python suggests that the earliest events in hindlimb development, 
specification of the position of the hindlimb with respect to dosoventral and 
anteroposterior axes, and initiation of limb development, have been 
maintained in pythons, but subsequent outgrowth of the hindlimb appears to 
be interrupted. Burmese python embryos have well-developed limb buds at 
the time of oviposition. Transverse sections of limb buds of an embryo at 1 
day after laying indicate that the ectoderm has uniform thickness 
dorsoventrally, and an apical ridge could not be detected. Scanning 
electron microscopy indicates that at 4 days of incubation, the limb bud is 
well-developed (Fig. 21a), but no apical ridge is visible (Fig. 21b). At 5 days 
of incubation, the shape of the limb bud is altered, and the apex is slightly 
puckered and appears to be degenerating (Fig. 21c).
In order to determine the pattern of cell death, limb buds of python 
embryos between 1 and 5 days of incubation were stained with Nile blue 
sulphate. At day 1, although there was no apparent morphological ridge, a 
clear stripe of cell death was detected along the apex of the limb bud (Fig. 
22a,b) in a pattern resembling that seen in the apical ridge of a stage 20 
chick embryo . At day 5, the stripe of cell death was surprisingly similar to 
that observed at E l, with a clear pattern of punctate staining along the apex 
of the limb bud (Fig, 22c,d). Areas of the apex that appeared to be flat in 
SEM did not show increased uptake of Nile blue, but rather staining 
appeared uniform along the apex (compare Fig. 21c with Fig. 22c,d). A 
second discrete patch of staining was observed at the junction of the ventral 
surface of the limb bud and the body wall (Fig. 22. c,d). These results 
indicate that lack of an apical ectodermal ridge in the limb buds of the 
Burmese python is consistent with the condition described for other limbless
reptiles (Rahmani, 1974, Raynaud, 1977, Raynaud, 1985, Raynaud, 1990), 
although comparison with chick limbs indicates that lack of a ridge in 
pythons is not associated with a high level of cell death.
Figure 21. Scanning electron micrographs of python limb buds
a. Distal view of the right limb bud and trunk of a Burmese python embryo at 
4 days of incubation, b. High power view of the limb bud of a Burmese 
python embryo at 4 days of incubation. The distal tip of the bud lacks an 
apical ectodermal ridge, c. Distal view of the limb bud of a Burmese python 
embryo at 5 days of incubation.
Figure 22. Cell death in python limb buds
Limb buds of Burmese pythons at 1 (a, b) and 5 (c, d) days of incubation 
stained with Nile blue sulphate to show the pattern of cell death, a. At 1 day 
of incubation, a thin stripe of dark, punctate staining is visible along the apex 
of the bud (a. ventral-distal view, b. apical view), c, d. At 5 days of 
incubation, a thin stripe of dark punctate staining, similar to that seen at 1 
day, is visible along the apex of the bud (c. ventral view, d. apical view). 
Note staining at junction of ventral (left) aspect of the limb bud and the body 
wall in d.
2.4 Gene expression in the python limb ectoderm
Absence of a morphologically distinct apical ridge suggested that 
pythons lack the specialized epithelium required for maintenance of limb 
outgrowth. To determine whether python limb bud ectoderm might 
nevertheless express genes normally associated with an apical ridge, 
expression of DLX, FGF2, and MSX genes was examined by staining 
embryos with antibodies against these proteins. The expression profile and 
specificity of these antibodies has been well-characterized in a variety of 
species (Done and Zeller, 1994, Liem et al., 1995, Panganiban et ai, 1995), 
and this approach allows direct comparison with chick embryos. In the chick 
embryo, FGF2 is expressed at high levels in limb bud ectoderm and at lower 
levels in the mesenchyme (Fig. 23b; (Done and Zeller, 1994, Savage et ai, 
1993), and functional assays have shown that FGF2 can substitute for the 
apical ridge (Fallon et ai, 1994). In the python limb bud, FGF2 is expressed 
in limb bud mesenchyme, but limb ectoderm, which appears to have a 
uniform thickness around the entire limb bud, was negative for FGF2 (Fig. 
23a). Strong FGF2 expression was also detected in the developing kidney 
of the python embryo (Fig. 23g), as Dono and Zeller (1994) described for the 
chick embryo.
In mouse and chick embryos, Msx2 is expressed in the apical 
ectodermal ridge and in anterior limb bud mesenchyme (Coelho et ai, 1991, 
Davidson et a i, 1991), and Msx1 is expressed in a distal to proximal 
gradient in the limb mesenchyme and weakly in the apical ridge (Davidson 
et ai, 1991, Hill et a i, 1989). Mesenchymal expression of Msx1 is 
maintained by the apical ridge and can be rescued by FGF after ridge 
removal (Fallon et ai, 1994, Vogel, Roberts, and Niswander, 1995). In chick 
embryos, using the monoclonal antibody 4G1, which recognizes both MSX1 
and MSX2, nuclear expression was observed in the apical ridge, and in the
limb mesenchyme in a distal to proximal gradient of expression (Fig. 23d). 
This pattern of protein distribution is consistent with mRNA distribution 
described above. In python limb buds, MSX protein could not be detected in 
the limb ectoderm, but surprisingly, expression was detected in the 
mesenchyme in a distal to proximal gradient (Fig. 23c). Although it is not 
possible to distinguish between MSX1 and MSX2 expression in the 
mesenchymal domain, the lack of ectodermal staining indicates that neither 
MSX1 nor MSX2 are expressed in python limb ectoderm. Members of the 
Dix family are also expressed in the apical ridge of fish and tetrapods (Fig. 
23f) (Akimenko et a., 1994, Bulfone eta., 1993, Dolle, Price, and Duboule, 
1992, Ferrari at a/., 1995). Using a Dll antibody which has been shown to 
detect Dll expression in several arthropods and DLX in the chick limb and 
zebrafish fin (Panganiban at al., 1995), DLX expression was examined in 
python embryos. DLX expression was not detected in the python limb bud 
(Fig. 23e), although strong expression was detected in the developing teeth 
and scale buds at later stages (Fig. 23h). Control experiments in which the 
primary antibodies were omitted showed no staining. Thus, several of the 
transcription factors and growth factors that characterize the apical ridge are 
absent from the python limb bud ectoderm. These results show that the 
python limb bud ectoderm lacks morphological and molecular 
specializations that are characteristic of an apical ectodermal ridge. This 
suggests that limblessness results from failure to develop a functional apical 
ridge.
Figure 23. Gene expression in limb bud ectoderm
Antibody staining of python limb buds at 1 day of incubation (a, c, e) and 
stage 20 chick leg buds (b, d, f) with antibodies against FGF2, MSX. and 
DLX. a FGF2 expression is present in python limb bud mesenchyme but
could not be detected in the ectoderm (arrow), b. FGF2 expression is
present in chick limb bud mesenchyme and ectoderm, with strong 
expression in the apical ectodermal ridge (AER). c. MSX expression is 
present in python limb bud mesenchyme in a proximal to distal gradient but
could not be detected in the ectoderm (arrow), d. MSX expression is
present in chick limb bud mesenchyme in a proximal to distal gradient, and 
is present in the apical ectodermal ridge (AER). e. DLX expression could 
not be detected in the python limb. As a control, python maxilla was stained 
with the DLX antibody (h), and strong expression was detected in the tooth 
buds (arrows), f. DLX expression was detected in the apical ectodermal 
ridge (AER) of the chick leg bud. g. FGF2 was detected in the python 
kidney, a known site of expression in the chick (Dono and Zeller, 1994).
Python
FGF2 y t  "
MSX1&2
m h   .
/"4mm
Chick
/ , - :
 # " &  i  i < r '  .
2.5 Polarizing activity in python limbs and flank
Polarizing activity and Shh expression in chick limbs are maintained 
by the apical ridge (Vogel and Tickle, 1993; Laufer et al., 1994; Niswander at 
a., 1994). Therefore, given the lack of an apical ridge in python embryos, 
one might expect that the underlying mesenchyme of the limb would not 
express Shh or have polarizing activity. Shh expression was examined 
using an antibody against a small region of the N-terminal peptide, which 
recognizes the full-length and amino peptide of SHH (Bumcrot, Takada, and 
McMahon, 1995, Marti at a., 1995b). In chick limb, this antibody detects 
SHH in close association with Shh mRNA in the polarizing region (Fig. 24b) 
(Marti at a/., 1995b). In python embryos at 2 days of incubation, SHH 
expression was detected in the floor plate of the neural tube and in the 
notochord, but SHH could not be detected in the limb buds (Fig. 24a). In 
order to determine whether python limb bud mesenchyme has polarizing 
activity, python posterior limb bud mesenchyme was transplanted under the 
apical ridge at the anterior margin of a stage 20 chick wing bud, and the 
skeletal pattern was examined after 10 days. This resulted in a digit pattern 
of 2-2-2 3-4, indicating that python limb bud has polarizing activity (Fig. 
24c). Python anterior limb mesenchyme cells were also grafted under the 
anterior apical ridge of the chick wing bud. Surprisingly, anterior cells were 
also found to have polarizing activity, inducing a digit pattern of 2-2-S-4 in 
the chick wing (Fig. 24d). Thus, although pythons do not express SHH, they 
have retained polarizing activity in the limb, but this activity appears to be 
weak and not posteriorly restricted. Moreover, the ability of python limb bud 
cells to induce digits in the chick indicates conservation of polarizing signals 
during evolution.
To determine whether the snake flank has potential polarizing
activity, flank tissue was taken from 3 different positions along the body axis 
and transplanted to the anterior margin of the chick limb. Given the difficulty 
in obtaining accurate somite counts, the coiling pattern of the embryo (3 coils 
posterior to the head) was used as a guide for determining axial level. The 
leg bud develops on the third coil. Flank tissue taken from anterior to the first 
coil as well as within the first coil had no effect on chick limb development. 
Flank cells from coil 2, however, were found to have polarizing activity. The 
chick embryo in which coil 2 flank cells were grafted died before digit identity 
could be determined, but the autopod showed a clear anterior duplication. 
This indicates that, although forelimb development has been completely lost 
in pythons, polarizing activity has been retained in the flank lateral plate 
mesoderm anterior to the leg.
2.6 Python SHH expression can be rescued by a chick apical 
ridge.
The polarizing activity of python mesenchyme could be due to 
activation of Shh when the cells are grafted to the chick limb bud. According 
to this idea, python SHH would then induce additional digits in the chick 
limb. This was tested by transplanting cells from the posterior margin of the 
python limb bud under the anterior apical ridge of the chick wing, and 
examining SHH expression after 24 hours. Remarkably, SHH was activated 
in the graft of python posterior limb mesenchyme (Fig. 24e). In order to 
determine whether chick cells are indeed responding to python SHH, 
expression of Ptc was examined following grafts of python posterior limb 
mesenchyme to the chick limb. Ectopic Ptc expression was detected 
anteriorly in chick limb cells around the python graft by 19.5 hours after 
transplantation (Fig. 24f). Thus, python limb bud mesenchyme has 
polarizing activity and potential to express SHH. This potential can be 
activated by exposure to chick apical ridge signals, and SHH produced by
the graft subsequently activates the SHH transduction pathway in 
neighboring chick cells.
Figure 24. Polarizing activity in python limb buds
Anterior is at the top in all panels
a Python embryo at 2 days of incubation stained with an antibody against 
SHH. SHH expression (dark brown) could be detected in the floor plate (FP) 
and notochord (N), but could not be detected in the limb bud (arrow), b. 
SHH expression in the polarizing region of a chick wing bud. c. Wing of a 
ten day chick embryo with a duplicated pattern of digits that developed after 
transplantation of python posterior limb bud mesenchyme to the anterior 
margin of the wing bud at stage 20. Two additional digit 2s were specified 
anterior to the normal digits. (* = duplicated digits), d. Wing of a ten day 
chick embryo with a duplicated pattern of digits that developed after 
transplantation of python anterior limb bud mesenchyme to the anterior 
margin of the wing bud at stage 20. A single duplicated digit 2 is present 
anterior to the normal digits, e. SHH expression in a chick wing bud 24 
hours after python posterior limb mesenchyme was grafted anteriorly under 
the apical ridge. SHH expression was detected in the graft of python cells 
(arrow) and in the chick polarizing region, f, g. Double in situ hybridization 
showing expression of chick Ptc and Fgfd 24 hours after transplantation of 
python posterior limb mesenchyme to the anterior margin of the chick right 
wing bud. Red arrow in f (dorsal view) indicates ectopic expression of chick 
Ptc in anterior mesenchyme around the grafted python cells. Red arrow in g 
(ventral view) indicates anteriorly extended domain of Fgfd in the chick 
ectoderm overlying the python mesenchyme cells (compare anterior limit of 
Fgfd expression in the limb containing the graft (left) with the contalateral 
limb (right).
2.7 Failure of apical ridge formation in python limb buds
Failure of apical ridge formation in python limb buds could be due to 
either defective mesenchyme being unable to induce ridge formation in the 
ectoderm, or defective ectoderm being unable to respond to inductive 
signals from the mesenchyme. In chick embryos, transplantation of posterior 
mesenchyme to the anterior margin of the limb bud maintains the anterior 
part of the apical ridge which continues to express Fgf8 (Ohuchi et al., 1997). 
In order to determine whether python limb mesenchyme can maintain 
anterior ridge, posterior limb mesenchyme was transplanted from a 1 day 
python embryo to the anterior margin of a stage 20 chick limb, and 
expression of chick FgfS gene was examined to determine the extent of the 
apical ridge. By 19.5 hours after transplantation, the python graft had 
maintained the Fgf8 domain anteriorly in the chick limb (Fig. 24g), indicating 
that python limb mesenchyme can maintain an apical ridge. The ability of 
python limb mesenchyme to maintain the apical ridge in anterior ectoderm of 
the chick limb suggests that absence of an apical ridge in python limbs is 
due to defective ectoderm.
The molecular nature of ridge induction and maintenance is not yet 
understood but recent work has shown that dorsoventral 
compartmentalization of the limb ectoderm initially positions the ridge at the 
apex of the bud (See Chapter 1) (Grieshammer at a/., 1996, Laufer at a/., 
1997, Loomis at al., 1996, Noramly at al., 1996, Rodriguez-Esteban at al., 
1997, Ros at al., 1996). Limbless mutants lack En1 in the ventral limb 
ectoderm, and R-fng and WntJa are expressed throughout the limb 
ectoderm, rather than being restricted to dorsal ectoderm. WNT7a signaling 
activates Lmx1 expression throughout the dorsal mesenchyme of limbless 
mutants. in order to determine whether lack of dorsoventral 
compartmentalization of the ectoderm may underlie failure of apical ridge
formation in python limb ectoderm, dorsoventral polarity of the python limb 
bud was investigated using antibodies raised against the mouse EN protein 
(Davis et al., 1991) and the chick LMX1 protein (Riddle et a., 1995). In 
python limb buds, at 2 days after laying, EN expression was detected in the 
entire ventral part of the limb bud ectoderm, with a sharp boundary of 
expression running along the apex of the bud (Fig. 25a). LMX1 is expressed 
in dorsal limb mesenchyme within 7-10 cell diameters of the dorsal ectoderm 
(Fig. 25c). Strong nuclear staining can be seen proximally, but the 
expression domain is much weaker distally. Chick limb buds were stained 
with the same antibodies as controls. In the chick limb buds, EN expression 
was restricted to the ventral ectoderm and LMX expression was restricted to 
the dorsal mesenchyme (Fig. 25b,d). These results indicate that python leg 
buds have normal dorsoventral polarity.
Figure 25. Dorsoventral polarity in python limb buds.
Antibody staining to compare expression of EN and LMX1 in python limb 
buds at 1 day of incubation and chick limb buds at stage 20. a, b. 
Expression of EN is detected in the ventral ectoderm of the python limb bud 
(a) and the chick limb bud (b). EN expression is also seen in the python 
somites (). Expression of LMX1 is detected in the dorsal mesenchyme of 
the python limb bud (c) and the chick limb bud (d). D = dorsal, V = ventral.
Python Chick
3. Discussion
The results presented in this chapter indicate that loss of regional 
specialization along the python body axis is associated with loss of 
regionalized Hox gene expression. The finding that anterior boundaries of 
Hox expression have been transposed to the anterior limit of the trunk 
suggests that failure to initiate forelimb development may be due to 
elimination of the regional specialization that is generated by staggered 
boundaries of Hox expression. The results also suggest that a deficiency in 
the hindlimb ectoderm is the basis for limblessness. The initial events of 
python leg development appear to be in place, but the transition between 
limb initiation and maintenance of limb outgrowth is disrupted by failure to 
form a functional apical ridge. The patterns of gene expression and the 
ability of python limb bud mesenchyme to respond to chick ridge signals by 
expressing SHH, and to signal back to chick cells, indicate that signaling 
pathways involved in vertebrate limb development have been conserved in 
pythons.
3.1 Hox gene expression and regionalization of the python body 
The coordinated transposition of vertebral identity and Hox gene 
expression boundaries along the python body axis strongly suggests that the 
axial skeleton has been modified in snake evolution by changes in the 
upstream regulatory elements that control Hox gene expression. 
Accordingly, the anterior and posterior boundaries of Hoxc6 and HoxcS 
expression have been anteroposteriorly expanded along the paraxial 
mesoderm, and a thoracic positional value has been assigned to all somites 
within the domain. The differences seen within the rib bearing vertebrae, 
such as size, shape, presence of ventral hypapophyses at the anterior and 
posterior ends of the column, and presence of free ribs vs. lymphapophyses.
may be generated by different combinations of other Hox genes or 
differences in level of Hox gene expression (Pollock, Jay, and Bieberich, 
1992).
The compete absence of forelimb development in pythons is 
associated with loss of clear regionalization of the axial skeleton, whereas, 
the hindlimb develops in a region of morphological specialization. In many 
tetrapod vertebrates, the forelimb forms opposite the cervical-thoracic 
transition and anterior boundary of Hoxc6 in the paraxial mesoderm (Gaunt, 
1994; Burke et al., 1995). Although Hox gene expression in paraxial and 
lateral plate mesoderm is clearly under independent regulation (see chapter 
4), specification of limb position in the neural tube and lateral plate 
mesoderm must be aligned, and the possibility of mediolateral signaling 
during limb induction has not been excluded (reviewed in chapter 1). It is 
therefore tempting to speculate that during evolution of a more uniform body 
plan, in particular anterior to the cloaca, loss of staggered Hox gene 
expression boundaries may have eliminated forelimb inductive signals (or 
responses) that were localized to the pectoral position. The position of the 
hindlimb buds and cloacal opening (lateral plate mesoderm) and the 
thoracic-sacral transition (paraxial mesoderm) at the same axial level 
suggests the presence of a more posterior Hox expression boundary in both 
tissues.
The uniform pattern of vertebrae in snakes is reminiscent of 
segmental identity in the trunk of myriapods. Grenier at al. have
recently examined Hox gene expression in the centipede, which has 22 
limb-bearing trunk segments posterior to the head (Grenier at al., 1997). In 
insects Ubx/abd-A expression is associated with limblessness in abdominal 
segments (Vachon at al., 1992), however in centipedes Ubx/abd-A
expression is detected in almost the entire trunk (Grenier et al., 1997). Thus, 
in both centipedes and snakes, uniform Hox gene expression is associated 
with uniformity of segmental identity.
3.2 Dorsoventral position of the hindlimb
Position of the limb with respect to the dorsoventral axis corresponds 
with the transition from dorsal scales to wider ventral "belly" scales in the 
ectoderm. In chicks, the entire trunk ectoderm is compartmentalized (Altabef 
et a/., 1997). Dorsoventral position of the chick limb appears to be under the 
control of ectodermal factors (Michaud, Lapointe, and Le Douarin, 1997, 
Tanaka et a/., 1997). Thus, scale identity in pythons may reflect the 
dorsoventral polarity of the ectoderm. According to this idea, scales that form 
in the dorsal ectoderm have a different morphology than the scales that form 
in the ventral ectoderm due to different positional values of dorsal and 
ventral ectoderm. The fact that the junction between dorsal and ventral 
scales corresponds to the position at which the limb bud arises suggests that 
limb position and scale identity may be coordinated by factors that control 
dorsoventral polarity of the ectoderm.
3.3 Failure of hindlimb development
It is striking that the python limb bud has a normal tetrapod pattern of 
dorsoventral polarity at the molecular level, yet the apical ridge does not 
form. The pattern contrasts with that seen in limbless mutants, which fail to 
form a ridge because the dorsoventral compartmentalization of the limb 
ectoderm is lost and the entire limb is dorsalized. During normal ridge 
induction, the limb bud mesenchyme induces ridge formation by signaling to 
the overlying ectoderm, and dorsoventrally polarized factors in the limb 
ectoderm position the ridge by restricting to the dorsal-ventral junction (apex) 
the competence to respond to the inductive signals. The dorsoventrally
restricted pattern of LMX and EN expression in the python limb suggests that 
python R-fng, if expressed at all, is restricted to the dorsal ectoderm. These 
results, together with the ability of python limb mesenchyme to maintain 
ridge formation in the chick, suggest that python limblessness is due to an 
ectodermal defect that lies downstream of both dorsoventral 
compartmentalization of the ectoderm {Wnt7a, R-fng and En1 ) and 
mesenchymal signaling and probably disrupts interpretation of 
mesenchymal signals or physical assembly of the ridge.
Transplantation experiments show that python limb mesenchyme is 
competent to express SHH, but does not normally do so. When python limb 
cells are placed under a functional apical ridge, this competence is realized 
and Shh is activated in the python cells. SHH protein produced by python 
cells can be detected by an antibody against the N-terminal region of the 
mouse SHH peptide, and can induce expression of chicken ptc and 
establish a feedback loop in the chick limb, indicating strong evolutionary 
conservation of the python Shh gene. Moreover, the ability of python limb 
mesenchyme to maintain the chick apical ridge and associated FgfS 
expression anteriorly indicates that python limb mesenchyme has retained 
the ability to maintain the apical ridge, and suggests that the defect may be 
an inability of python limb ectoderm to respond to mesenchymal inductive 
signals. In the absence of an apical ridge, Shh is not induced in cells with 
polarizing potential, and the positive feedback loop needed to coordinate 
outgrowth and patterning (Niswander et al., 1994; Laufer et a., 1994) is not 
established. The extent of development seen in the python limb 
approximates that seen in the Shh knockout mouse, in which the girdle and 
proximal part of the femur develop (Chiang et a., 1996). The results of the 
python experiments described here together with the Shh knockout support 
the idea that Shh is not required for development of proximal limb elements.
Polarizing activity in the python leg bud does not appear to be 
restricted to the posterior; weak polarizing activity is also found anteriorly. 
The mechanisms involved in restricting polarizing activity in tetrapods would 
have been released from selective pressure once distal structures had been 
lost in ancestral snakes. Presence of polarized pentadactyl limbs in the 
marine mosasaurs (Carroll, 1988), the closest relatives of snakes (Caldwell 
and Lee, 1997), suggests that anterior polarizing activity in the python does 
not reflect a polydactylous ancestry, but is more likely a consequence of 
more recent changes that occurred after the autopod was lost.
Python flank cells have potential polarizing activity which can be 
activated by transplantation under the apical ridge of a chick limb bud. In 
chick embryos, the anterior limit of polarizing activity marks the posterior 
margin of the prospective forelimb bud (Hornbruch and Wolpert, 1991). The 
anterior limit of potential polarizing activity in the python embryo may be 
between the first and second coils of the trunk, suggesting that the primitive 
forelimb may have formed at this position. If polarizing activity in the flank 
was no longer stabilized after the forelimb was lost, however, then the 
original boundary may have been altered. Although the entire trunk anterior 
to the leg bud has been transformed towards thorax (flank), the anterior limit 
of polarizing potential may be restricted to a more posterior position. A 
similar dissociation between regional identity and polarizing potential is 
seen when extra limbs are induced; flank cells are anteriorized towards a 
wing identity, but the distribution of polarizing potential in the flank is 
unaffected.
The apparent weakness of python polarizing activity appears to be 
within the normal range for limbed reptiles. Fallon and Crosby (1977) and
Honig (1984) transplanted alligator, turtle, lizard and snapping turtle 
polarizing region cells to chick limb buds and found that while they all had 
polarizing activity, none could induce a full duplication in the chick. Honig 
(1984) suggested that this could be due to temperature differences between 
chick and reptile, although it is possible that reptile limbs may be polarized 
by relatively weaker signals.
3.4 Rescuing snake limb development
The results presented in this chapter raise the question of whether 
limb development could be rescued in modern snakes if missing factor(s) 
could be restored. In the python hindlimb, initiation of limb budding appears 
to be normal, but establishment of the positive feedback loop between the 
apical ridge and polarizing region is disrupted by an ectodermal defect that 
prevents cells from responding to inductive signals. FGFs can rescue limb 
development in limbless and wingless mutants which fail to form a ridge. My 
own preliminary experiments have shown that FGF2 can induce outgrowth of 
the python genital tubercle, and Raynaud and colleagues have shown that 
addition of FGF2 can delay involution of slow worm limb buds in organ 
culture (Raynaud et al., 1995). The presence of polarizing potential in 
python limb buds suggests that application of FGF may be sufficient to 
rescue limb development in the python. In the context of the python limb 
bud, FGF would act as a substitute for a defective ectoderm which is unable 
to send, and possibly to receive, signals involved in the positive feedback 
loop described by Niswander et al. (1994) and Laufer et al. (1994). Based 
on the pattern of gene expression, one would predict that the limb would 
have a normal dorsoventral polarity, perhaps with duplicated digits arising 
from the weak anterior polarizing potential. This experiment should also 
have important phylogenetic significance, because if pythons are in fact 
descendants of mosasauroids, then the ankle of the snake leg should have a
separate astragalus and calcaneum, a condition found in the hindlimb of 
mosasaurs but none of the other squamates (Caldwell and Lee, 1997).
3.5 Evolution of the snake body plan
The results presented in this chapter have implications for 
understanding the developmental mechanisms that underlie key changes in 
evolution of the snake body plan. Snakes evolved from tetrapod lizards, 
which have complete forelimbs and hindlimbs and a clearly regionalized 
axial skeleton as a primitive condition (Fig. 26, node 1; Romer, 1956). 
Recent work has shown that the closest relatives of snakes are marine 
mosasaurs (Caldwell and Lee, 1997). The most primitive snake known, 
Pachyrhachis problematicus, supports the link between mosasaurs and 
snakes, and shows that most of the morphological features of modern 
snakes, including loss of the pectoral girdle and forelimb, elongation of the 
trunk and loss of a clearly regionalized vertebral column, were in place by 
the mid-Cretaceous (~100 MYA; Carroll, 1987; Caldwell and Lee, 1997). 
Together with the results presented in this chapter, this suggests that loss of 
pectoral limb initiation signals (i.e., FGF), and expansion of Hox gene 
expression along the main body axis had already occurred in the 
Pachyrhachis lineage (Fig. 26, node 2). Changes in hindlimb bud ectoderm 
that resulted in loss of apical ridge formation and loss of Shh expression 
appear to have occurred after the divergence of the Pachyrhachis lineage 
and prior to the divergence of the lineage leading to pythons and boas (Fig. 
26, node 3), because the Pachyrhachis hindlimb was complete from the 
well-developed pelvic girdle to the tarsals and possibly digits (Caldwell and 
Lee, 1997; M. Caldwell, pers. comm). The presence of polarized, 
pentadactyl limbs in mosasaurs (Carroll, 1988) supports the proposed 
position of this event in figure 26. If anterior polarizing activity had been 
acquired earlier, then one would expect to find polydactyly in the mosasaur
lineage.
The postcranial skeleton of pythons and boas (Booidea) differs than 
that of advanced snakes (Colubroidea). Pythons posses vestigial hindlimbs, 
and hypapophyses are found only on the first 64 vertebrae, whereas 
colubrids are completely limbless and all of the vertebrae contain 
hypapophyses. Based on the results reported in this chapter, one can 
predict that the transition from a boid-like body plan to the colubrid body plan 
must have involved loss of hindlimb bud initiation and further expansion of 
Hox gene expression domains along the primary body axis (Fig. 26, node 4). 
Examination of expression patterns of genes that characterize the early limb 
and the patterns of Hox gene expression in extant colubrids will further test 
these hypotheses.
Figure 26. Developmental model for evolution of the snake 
body plan
Phylogenetic relationships among these taxa based on the work of Caldwell 
and Lee (Caldwell and Lee, 1997) and Rieppel (Rieppel, 1988). Tree shows 
evolutionary relationships among the following (in bold: the primitive snake 
Pachyrhachis problem aticus, which lacks forelimbs, has complete or 
near-complete hindlimbs and a large number of similar vertebrae which 
nonetheless have identifiable regional differences; Booidea (including 
pythons and boids) which lack forelimbs, have vestigial hindlimbs and a 
large number of morphologically uniform vertebrae with few or equivocal 
regional differences; Colubroidea (advanced snakes) which lack both 
forelimbs and hindlimbs and have a large number of near-identical 
vertebrae; and all other squamates which have complete forelimbs and 
hindlimbs and a clearly regionalized axial skeleton as a primitive condition. 
Node 1 indicates the origin of squamates, node 2 indicates the origin of 
snakes, node 3 indicates the origin of modern snakes, and node 4 indicates 
the origin of advanced snakes. Boxes located between nodes 1,2,3,  and 4 
contain proposed developmental events associated with evolutionary 
changes to the snake body plan. Justification for each of the proposed 
events is contained within the main text of this chapter (section 3.5). In this 
scheme, it is assumed that the primitive condition at node 1 is a 
morphologically regionalized axial skeleton and complete, normally 
polarized forelimbs and hindlimbs. Arrow indicates the lineage to which 
pythons belong.
other squamates 
Lizards";
(Complete forelimbs & hindlimbs; 
Regionalized axial skeleton)
Pachyrhachis 
(Complete hindlimbs only)
Booidea 
(Vestigial hindlimbs)
Colubroidea
(Limbless)
Advanced snakes
Loss of hindlimb induction 
Uniform Hox gene expression 
along tx>dy axis
Modern snakes (Serpentes)
Loss of AER in hindlimb bud (- FGF, MSX, DLX) 
Loss of SHH expression in polarizing region 
Acquisition of polarizing activity anteriorly in leg
Snakes (Ophidia)
Loss of foreiimb induction 
Expansion of Hox gene expression 
boundaries along body axis
Squamates
CHAPTER SIX: General Discussion
1. FGF as limb initiation signal
In this thesis, I have shown that fibroblast growth factors can induce 
formation of complete additional limbs when applied to the flank of pre-limb 
bud stage chick embryos. This work, which was published in 1995 (Cohn et 
al., 1995), suggested that a member of the FGF family could be the 
endogenous limb initiation signal, and it now appears that the newest 
member of the FGF family, FGF10, may be this signal (See chapter 3).
2. Positioning FGF along the body axis
The position in which Fgf10 is expressed along the primary body axis 
could determine the position at which limbs form. In chapter 4, I showed that 
FGF application reprograms the pattern of Hox gene expression in the flank 
to reproduce a wing or leg expression pattern before a new domain of Fgf8 
expression is induced, suggesting that the early primary pattern of Hox gene 
expression in lateral plate mesoderm along the primary body axis specifies 
the positions where limbs develop. An attractive hypothesis is that local 
expression of Fgf in the lateral plate may be under the control of Hox genes. 
This idea is supported by the recent finding that H0XB7 directly activates 
bFGF expression in melanoma cell lines and primary cultures (Care et a/., 
1996). The FGF2 promoter region contains at least 5 homeoprotein binding 
sites, and in vitro assays show that H0XB7 protein induces a dose- 
dependent increase in bFGF promoter activity. Moreover, blocking H0XB7 
activity with antisense oligonucleotides inhibits bFGF expression and cell 
proliferation in melanoma cell lines (Care et a., 1996). Thus, it appears 
that at least one Hox gene can directly activate transcription of bFGF. 
Disruption and overexpression of multiple Hox genes in lateral plate 
mesoderm should indicate whether Hox genes are involved in activation of
FGF during limb induction. All 4 paralogues of the Hox9 group have been 
knocked-out individually and two double mutants have been generated 
(Chen and Capecchi, 1997, Fromental-Ramain et al., 1996, Suemori, 
Takahashi, and Noguchi, 1995), but none of these experiments have 
informed the problem of limb initiation. Although limb phenotypes have 
been observed in some mutants (Fromental-Ramain at a., 1996), none have 
developed changes in limb position. Interpretation of these results is 
complicated by the ability of Hox genes to act synergistically (Chen and 
Capecchi, 1997) and the discovery that loss of function of a single Hox gene 
can have a collateral effects on expression of other Hox genes. For 
example, mice with mutations in Hoxc9 were found to have extended 
domains of Hoxc8 expression (Suemori at a/., 1995). Generation of 
quadruple mutants to knock-out entire paralogue groups should be 
informative, and monitoring the responses of other Hox genes should be an 
important component of these studies.
How is FGF maintained at limb levels? Fgf10 is expressed in lateral 
plate mesoderm of the limbs and flank through stage 12, after which 
expression is downregulated in the flank but maintained in the limbs 
(Ohuchi, 1997). In Xenopus, aFGF is activated by Xbra, and aFGF feeds 
back to maintain continued expression of Xbra (Schulte-Merker and Smith, 
1995). Xbra is a Xenopus homologue of the Brachyury or T gene, and 
recent work has identified a family of genes, Tbx, which contain a region 
homologous to the DNA-binding region of the T gene, known a T-box 
(Gibson-Brown at a., 1996). Interestingly, Tbx5 and Tbx4 are expressed in 
the forelimb and hindlimb, respectively, from stage 13 (Ohuchi at a/., 1997). 
Thus, based on the aFGF - Xbra positive feedback loop in frogs, it is possible 
that Tbx expression in the limbs could maintain expression of Fgf 10 in the 
limbs when it is downregulated in the flank, and FGF could, in turn, feedback
to maintain expression of Tbx in the limbs. If this is correct, then loss of 
function mutations (or compound mutations) in Tbx genes may results in loss 
or truncation of the limbs.
3. Reprograming Hox expression in the flank
The ability of FGF to transform positional identity and Hox gene 
expression in chick lateral plate mesoderm is similar to the role proposed for 
FGF in patterning the a-p axis in Xenopus (Doniach, 1995, Isaacs, Pownall, 
and Slack, 1994, Pownall at ai, 1996, Ruiz i Altaba and Melton, 1989). 
Experiments in Xenopus have shown that FGF acts as a posteriorizing factor 
during mesoderm induction and at gastrula and neurula stages by induction 
of posterior Hox genes (including Hoxb9 ) via Xcad (a caudal [cdx] 
homologue) (Pownall et ai, 1996). How does FGF induce a differential 
response of Hox genes in chick lateral plate mesoderm according to 
position? The elapsed time between FGF application and the earliest 
changes in Hox expression suggests that regulation of Hox gene expression 
patterns by FGF is unlikely to be a direct effect. Instead FGF may interfere 
with systems which regulate expression of Hox genes. After Hox gene 
expression has been initiated, patterns are stabilized by regulatory proteins 
belonging to the Trithorax group (trxG)or Polycomb group (PcG). Trithorax 
and Polycomb (in Drosophila), and their homologues in vertebrates, act by 
respectively maintaining the "on" state in Hox genes that have been 
transcriptionally activated, or the "off" state in Hox genes that have been 
repressed (Simon, 1995). In heterozygous mutants for the Mixed-lineage 
leukaemia {Mil) gene, a mouse homologue of trithorax, Hox gene expression 
is not maintained and both anterior and posterior homeotic 
transformations are observed in the vertebral column (Yu et ai, 1995). This 
is reminiscent of the ability of FGF to induce changes in Hox gene 
expression that lead to bidirectional transformations of cell fate in flank
lateral plate mesoderm (i.e., anterior to wing and posterior to leg). If FGF 
locally interferes with such regulatory genes in lateral plate mesoderm, this 
could explain how a single factor induces limbs of different types according 
to where it is applied. The mechanism by which FGF acts on Hox gene 
expression needs to be explored further, and it will be interesting to 
determine how chick homologues of trxG, PcG and Cdx genes respond to 
FGF application to different positions along the body axis.
4. Implications for co-ordinating axial patterning
The ability of FGF to alter Hox9 gene expression exclusively in lateral 
plate mesoderm, even when FGF beads are placed directly in the paraxial 
mesoderm, indicates that Hox gene expression can be independently 
regulated in the neural tube, paraxial and lateral plate mesoderm. Although 
modularity has clear evolutionary advantages, the positional relationship of 
the brachial and sacral plexus and the fore-and hindlimbs must be co
ordinated for the limbs to be properly wired and functional. The nature of this 
relationship remains to be determined, but the results presented in this 
thesis suggest that the tissues are linked by a mechanism that does not 
involve coregulation of Hox gene expression. The observations of Oliver et 
al. (1989) and Burke at a (1995) -  that forelimbs develop in lateral plate 
mesoderm opposite the anterior boundary of Hoxc6 expression in paraxial 
mesoderm -  may reflect the presence of secondary signals induced by Hox 
genes which act to coordinate axial patterning in different tissues. Complete 
loss of the forelimb in pythons may be due to anterior extension of Hoxc6 
(and possibly Hox9) expression boundaries, which cause uniformity of 
pattern along the body axis and may eliminate specialized signaling regions 
that normally act to induce limb initiation.
5. Evolution of body plans
The observation that Hox gene expression is uniform in the 
morphologically uniform vertebrae of pythons indicates that changes in Hox 
regulation have occurred in snake evolution. Comparative analyses of Hox 
gene expression in insects and Crustacea have revealed that evolutionary 
diversification of the arthropods has involved changes upstream of the Hox 
genes (Averof and Patel, 1997) and downstream of the Hox genes (Warren 
et al., 1994). My analysis of Hox gene expression in pythons, taken together 
with the chick and mouse comparison of Gaunt (1994) and Burke at a/.
(1995), provides strong evidence that modification upstream of the Hox 
genes is a viable route for evolutionary diversification of vertebrates.
These results raise several further questions that will need to be 
resolved by cloning and studying the expression patterns of python Hox 
genes. Differential Hox gene expression in paraxial mesoderm is involved in 
patterning the vertebrate hindbrain (Itasaki at a., 1996), which controls the 
pattern of cranial nerves. The pattern of Hox gene expression in the python 
paraxial mesoderm begs the question of how hindbrain patterning is 
achieved in snakes. This should be clarified by examining expression of 
more anterior Hox genes, in particular the Hox1, Hox2 and Hox4 paralogue 
groups.
Another key question emerging from this work and the work of 
Aparicio at al. (1997) deals with organization of the snake Hox complex. The 
Hox complex of the pufferfish Fugu is now known to have undergone 
extensive evolution, involving loss of up to 11 Hox genes (and a possible 
gain of 1) (Aparicio at a., 1997). Fugu has an extremely derived body plan 
which includes loss of the pelvic fins and ribs. Snakes have dispensed with 
much of the postcranial specialization seen in other vertebrates (although
the head is highly specialized) in evolution of a generalized, uniform body 
plan. It will be interesting to determine to what extent these morphological 
changes are rooted in genomic changes, in contrast to the regulatory 
changes demonstrated in this thesis. Finally, the experimental analysis of 
the python hindlimb bud strongly suggests that application of FGF should 
rescue python limb development.
REFERENCES
Abraham, J. A., A. Mergia, J. L. Whang, A. Tumolo, J. Friedman, K. A. Hjerrild, 
D. Gospodarowicz, and J. G. Fiddes. (1986). Nucleotide sequence of a 
bovine clone encoding the angiogenic protein, basic fibroblast growth factor. 
Science 233 : 545-8.
Abud, H. E., J. A. Skinner, F. J. McDonald, M. T. Bedford, P. Lonai, and J. K. 
Heath. (1996). Ectopic expression of Fgf-4 in chimeric mouse embryos 
induces the expression of early markers of limb development in the lateral 
ridge. Dev Genet 19 : 51-65.
Agar, W. E. (1907). The development of the anterior mesoderm, and paired 
fins with their nerves, in Lepidosiren and Protopterus. Trans. Roy. Soc. Edin. 
45 ; 611-640.
Akam, M., M. Averof, J. Castelli-Gair, R. Dawes, F. Falciani, and D. Ferrier.
(1994). The evolving role of Hox genes in arthropods. Development 
Supplement : 209-215.
Akimenko, A.-M., S. Johnson, M. Westerfield, and M. Ekker. (1995). 
Differential induction of four msx homeobox genes during fin development 
and regeneration in zebrafish. Development 121 : 347-357.
Akimenko, M.-A., and M. Ekker. (1995). Anterior duplication of the Sonic 
hedgehog expression protein in the pectoral fin buds of zebrafish treated 
with retinoic acid. Dev. Biol. 170 ; 243-247.
Akimenko, M. A., M. Ekker, J. Wegner, W. Lin, and M. Westerfield. (1994). 
Combinatorial expression of three zebrafish genes related to distal-less: part 
of a homeobox gene code for the head. J Neurosci 14 : 3475-86.
Altabef, M., J. D. W. Clarke, and C. Tickle. (1997). Dorso-ventral ectodermal 
compartments and origin of apical ectodermal ridge in developing chick 
limb. Development. : In press.
Aparicio, S., Hawkerm K., A. Cottage, Y. Mikawa, L. Zuo, B. Venkatesh, E. 
Chen, R. Krumlauf, and S. Brenner. (1997). Organization of the Fugu 
rubripes Hox clusters: evidence for continuing evolution of vertebrate 
complexes. Nature Genetics : 79-83.
Averof, M., and N. H. Patel. (1997). Crustacean appendage evolution 
associated with changes in Hox gene expresion. Nature 388 : 682-686.
Awgulewitsch, A., and D. Jacobs. (1990). Differential expression of Hox 3.1 
protein in subregions of the embryonic and adult spinal cord. Development 
108 : 411-20.
Balinsky, B. I. (1925). Transplantation des ohrblaschens bei Triton. Wilhelm 
Roux Arch, fur EntwMech. Orgs 143 : 718-731.
Balinsky, B. I. (1933). Das extremetatenseitenfeld, seine ausdehnung und 
beschaffenheit. Roux Arch 130 : 704-747.
Balinsky, B. I. (1965). An Introduction to Embryology. Second ed. London: 
W. B. Saunders.
Bamshad, M., R. C. Lin, D. J. Law, W. C. Watkins, P. A. Krakowiak, M. E. 
Moore, P. Franceschini, Lala. R., L. B. Holmes, T. C. Gebhur, B. G. Bruneau, 
A. Schinzel, J. G. Seidman, C. E. Seidman, and L. B. Jorde. (1997). 
Mutations in human TBX3 alter limb, apocrine and genital development in 
ulnar-mammary syndrome. Nature Genetics 16 : 311-315.
Basler, K., and G. Struhl. (1994). Compartment boundaries and the control of 
Drosophila limb pattern by hedgehog protein. Nature 368 : 208-14.
Bateson, W. (1894). Materials for the study of variation. London: Macmillan.
Beddington, R. S. P., and J. C. Smith. (1993). Control of vertebrate 
gastrulation: inducing signals and responding genes. Curr Opin Genet Devel 
3 : 655-661.
Bellairs, A. (1969). The Life of Reptiles. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Bernfield, M., M. I .  Hinkes, and R. L. Gallo. (1993). Developmental 
expression of the syndecans: possible function and regulation. Development 
Supplement : 205-12.
Bienz, M. (1994). Homeotic genes and positional signalling in the 
Drosophila viscera. Trends Genet 10 : 22-6.
Bitgood, M. J., and A. P. McMahon. (1995). Hedgehog and Bmp genes are 
coexpressed at many diverse sites of cell-cell interaction in the mouse 
embryo. Dev. Biol. 172 : 126-138.
Blair, S. S. (1995). Compartments and appendage development in 
Drosophila. Bioessays 17 : 299-309.
Boulet, A. M., and M. R. Capecchi. (1996). Targeted disruption of Hoxc-4 
causes esophageal defects and vertebral transformations. Dev. Biol. 177 : 
232-249.
Bueno, D., J. Skinner, H. Abud, and J. K. Heath. (1996). Spatial and 
temporal relationships between Shh, Fgf4, and Fgf8 gene expression at 
diverse signalling centers during mouse development. Dev Dyn 207 : 291-9.
Bulfone, A., L. Puelles, M. H. Porteus, M. A. Frohman, G. R. Martin, and J. L. 
Rubenstein. (1993). Spatially restricted expression of Dlx-1, Dlx-2 (Tes-1), 
Gbx-2, and Wnt-3 in the embryonic day 12.5 mouse forebrain defines 
potential transverse and longitudinal segmental boundaries. J Neurosci 13 : 
3155-72.
Bumcrot, D. A., R. Takada, and A. P. McMahon. (1995). Proteolytic 
processing yields two secreted forms of sonic hedgehog. Mol Cell Biol 15 :
2294-303.
Burke, A. C., C. E. Nelson, B. A. Morgan, and C. Tabin. (1995). Hox genes 
and the evolution of vertebrate axial morphology. Development 121 ; 333- 
Burke, R., and K. Basler. (1996). Hedgehog-dependent patterning in the 
Drosophila eye can occur in the absence of Dpp signaling. Dev Biol 179 : 
360-8.
Caldwell, M. W., and M. S. Lee. (1997). A snake with legs from the marine 
Cretaceous of the Middle East. Nature 386 : 705-709.
Care, A., A. Silvani, E. Meccia, G. Mattia, A. Stoppacciaro, G. Parmiani, C 
Peschle, and M. P. Colombo. (1996). H0XB7 constitutively activates basic 
fibroblast growth factor in melanomas. Mol Cell Biol 16 : 4842-51.
Carrington, J. L., and J. F. Fallon. (1984). The stages of flank ectoderm 
capable of responding to ridge induction in the chick embryo. J Embryol Exp 
Morphol 84 : 19-34.
Carroll, R. (1988). Vertebrate Paleontology and Evolution. New York: 
Freeman.
Carroll, S. B. (1995). Hox genes and the evolution of arthropods and 
chordates. Nature 376 : 479-485.
Chan, D. C., E. Laufer, C. Tabin, and P. Leder. (1995). Polydactylous limbs in 
Strong's Luxoid mice result from ectopic polarizing activity. Development 
121 : 1971-8.
Charit, J., W. de Graaff, S. Shen, and J. Deschamps. (1994). Ectopic 
expression of Hoxb-8 causes duplication of the ZPA in the forelimb and 
homeotic transformation of axial structures. Cell 78 : 589-601.
Chaube, S. (1959). On axiation and symmetry in transplanted wing of the 
chick. J. Exp. Zoo I. 140 : 29-77.
Chen, F., and M. R. Capecchi. (1997). Targeted mutations in Hoxa-9 and 
Hoxb-9 reveal synergistic interactions. Dev Biol 181 : 186-96.
Chevallier, A., M. Kieny, and A. Mauger. (1978). Limb-somite relationship: 
effect of removal of somitic mesoderm on the wing musculature. J Embryol 
Exp Morphol 43 : 263-78.
Chiang, C., Y. Litingtung, E. Lee, K. E. Young, J. L. Corden, H. Westphal, and 
P. A. Beachy. (1996). Cyclopia and defective axial patterning in mice lacking 
Sonic hedgehog gene function. Nature 383 : 407-13.
Christian, J. L., D. J. Olson, and R. T. Moon. (1992). Xwnt-8 modifies the 
character of mesoderm induced by bFGF in isolated Xenopus ectoderm. 
Embo J 11 : 33-41.
Christiansen, J. H., C. L. Dennis, C. A. Wicking, S. J. Monkley, D. G. 
Wilkinson, and B. J. Wainwright. (1995). Murine Wnt-11 and Wnt-12 have 
temporally and spatially restricted expression patterns during embryonic 
development. Mech Dev 51 : 341-50.
Coates, M. I. (1994). The origin of vertebrate limbs. Development 
Supplement : 169-180.
Coelho, C. N., L. Sumoy, B. J. Rodgers, D. R. Davidson, R. E. Hill, W. B. 
Upholt, and R. A. Kosher. (1991). Expression of the chicken homeobox- 
containing gene G Hox-8 during embryonic chick limb development. Mech 
Dev 34 : 143-54.
Cohn, M. J., J. C. Izpisua-Belmonte, H. Abud, J. K. Heath, and C. Tickle.
(1995). Fibroblast growth factors induce additional limb development from 
the flank of chick embryos. Cell 80 ; 739-46.
Condie, B. G., and M. R. Capecchi. (1994). Mice with targeted disruptions in 
the paralogous genes Hoxa-3 and Hoxd-3 reveal synergistic interactions. 
Nature 370 : 304-7.
Conlon, R. A. (1995). Retinoic acid and pattern formation in vertebrates. 
Trends in Genetics 11 : 314-419.
Crossley, P. H., and G. R. Martin. (1995). The mouse Fgf8 gene encodes a 
family of polypeptides and is expressed in regions that direct outgrowth and 
patterning in the developing embryo. Development 121 : 439-51.
Crossley, P. H., G. Minowada, C. A. MacArthur, and G. R. Martin. (1996). 
Roles for FGF8 in the induction, initiation, and maintenance of chick limb 
development. Cell 84 : 127-36.
Davidson, D. R., A. Crawley, R. E. Hill, and C. Tickle. (1991). Position- 
dependent expression of two related homeobox genes in developing 
vertebrate limbs. Nature 352 : 429-31.
Davis, A. P., D. P. Witte, H. Li Hsieh, S. S. Potter, and M. R. Capecchi. (1995). 
Absence of radius and ulna in mice lacking Hoxa-11 and Hoxd-11. Nature 
375 : 791-5.
Davis, C. A., D. P. Holmyard, K. J. Millen, and A. L. Joyner. (1991). 
Examining pattern formation in mouse, chicken and frog embryos with an 
En-specific antiserum. Development 111 : 287-98.
De Robertis, E. M. (1994). The homeobox in cell differentiation and 
evolution. In Guidebook to the Homeobox Genes. Edited by D. Duboule. 13- 
23. Oxford; Oxford University Press.
Dealy, C. N., A. Roth, D. Ferrari, A. M. Brown, and R. A. Kosher. (1993). Wnt- 
5a and Wnt-7a are expressed in the developing chick limb bud in a manner 
suggesting roles in pattern formation along the proximodistal and 
dorsoventral axes. Mech Dev 43 : 175-86.
Dhouailly, D., and M. Kieny. (1972). The capacity of the flank somatic 
mesoderm of early bird embryos to participate in limb development. Dev. 
Biol. 28 : 162-175.
Dolle, P., A. Dierich, M. LeMeur, T. Schimmang, B. Schuhbaur, P. Chambon, 
and D. Duboule. (1993). Disruption of the Hoxd-13 gene induces localized 
heterochrony leading to mice with neotenic limbs. Cell 75 : 431-41.
Dolle, P., J. 0. Izpisua-Belmonte, J. M. Brown, C. Tickle, and D. Duboule.
(1991). HOX-4 genes and the morphogenesis of mammalian genitalia. 
Genes Dev 5 : 1767-7.
Dolle, P., M. Price, and D. Duboule. (1992). Expression of the murine Dlx-1 
homeobox gene during facial, ocular and limb development. Differentiation 
49 ; 93-9.
Dolle, P., E. Ruberte, P. Kastner, M. Petkovich, 0. M. Stoner, L. J. Gudas, and 
P. Chambon. (1989). Differential expression of genes encoding a, (3 and y 
retinoic acid receptors and CRABP in the developing limbs of the mouse. 
Nature 342 ; 702-705.
Doniach, T. (1995). Basic FGF as an inducer of anteroposterior neural 
pattern. Cell 83 : 1067-70.
Dono, R., and R. Zeller. (1994). Cell-type-specific nuclear translocation of 
fibroblast growth factor-2 isoforms during chicken kidney and limb 
morphogenesis. Dev Biol 163 : 316-30.
Duboule, D. (1995). Vertebrate Hox genes and proliferation: an alternative 
pathway to homeosis? Curr Opin Genet Dev 5 : 525-8.
Dudley, A. T., K. M. Lyons, and E. J. Robertson. (1995). A requirement for 
bone morphogenetic protein-7 during development of the mammalian 
kidney and eye. Genes Dev. 9 : 2795-2807.
Duprez, D. M., K. Kostakopoulou, P. Francis-West, C. Tickle, and P. M. 
Brickell. (1996). Activation of Fgf-4 and HoxD gene expression by BMP-2 
expressing cells in the developing chick limb. Development 122 : 1821-8.
Eisenberg, L. M., P. W. Ingham, and A. M. Brown. (1992). Cloning and 
characterization of a novel Drosophila Wnt gene, Dwnt-5, a putative 
downstream target of the homeobox gene distal-less. Dev Biol 154 : 73-83.
Epstein, D. J., E. Marti, M. P. Scott, and A. P. McMahon. (1996). Antagonizing 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A in the dorsal CNS activates a conserved 
Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway. Development 122 : 2885-94.
Fallon, . J. F., and G. M. Crosby. (1977). Polarising zone activity in limb buds 
of amniotes. In Vertebrate Limb and Somite Morphogenesis. Edited by D. A. 
Ede, J. R. Hinchliffe and M. Balls. 55-70. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Fallon, J. F., J. M. Frederick, J. L. Carrington, M. E. Lanser, and B. K.
Simandl. (1983). Studies on a limbless mutant in the chick embryo. In Limb 
Development and Regeneration. Edited by J. F. Fallon and A. I. Caplan. New 
York: Alan R. Liss.
Fallon, J. F., A. Lopez-Martinez, M. A. Ros, M. P. Savage, B. B. Olwin, and B. 
K. Simandl. (1994). FGF-2: Apical ectodermal ridge growth signal for chick 
limb development. Science 264 : 104-107.
Fan, C. M., and M. Tessier-Lavigne. (1994). Patterning of mammalian 
somites by surface ectoderm and notochord: evidence for sclerotome 
induction by a hedgehog homolog. Cell 79 : 1175-86.
Fawcett, D., P. Pasceri, R. Fraser, M. Colbert, J. Rossant, and V. Giguere.
(1995). Postaxial polydactyly in forelimbs of CRABP-II mutant mice. 
Development 121 : 671-9.
Ferrari, D., L. Sumoy, J. Gannon, H. Sun, A. M. Brown, W. B. Upholt, and R. 
A. Kosher. (1995). The expression pattern of the Distal-less homeobox- 
containing gene Dlx-5 in the developing chick limb bud suggests its 
involvement in apical ectodermal ridge activity, pattern formation, and 
cartilage differentiation. Mech Dev 52 : 257-64.
Francis, P. H., M. K. Richardson, P. M. Brickell, and C. Tickle. (1994). Bone 
morphogenetic proteins and a signalling pathway that controls patterning in 
the developing chick limb. Development 120 : 209-18.
Francis-West, P., K. E. Robertson, D. A. Ede, C. Rodriguez, J. C. Izpisua- 
Belmonte, B. Houston, D. W. Burt, C. Gribbin, P. M. Brickell, and C. Tickle.
(1995). Expression of genes encoding bone morphogenetic proteins and 
sonic hedgehog in talpid (taS) limb buds: their relationships in the signalling 
cascade involved in limb patterning. Dev Dyn 203 : 187-97.
Fromental- Ramain, C., X. Warot, N. Messadecq, M. LeMeur, P. Dolle, and P. 
Chambon. (1996). Hoxa-13 and Hoxd-13 play a crucial role in the patterning 
of the limb autopod. Development 122 : 2997-3011.
Fromental-Ramain, C., X. Warot, S. Lakkaraju, B. Favier, H. Haack, C. Birling, 
A. Dierich, P. Dolle, and P. Chambon. (1996). Specific and redundant 
functions of the paralogous Hoxa-9 and Hoxd-9 genes in forelimb and axial 
skeleton patterning. Development 122 : 461-472.
Gadow, H. F. (1933). The Evolution of the Vertebral Column. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Garcia-Fernandez, J., and P. W. Holland. (1994). Archetypal organization of 
the amphioxus Hox gene cluster. Nature 370 : 563-6.
Gardiner, D. M., B. Blumberg, Y. Komine, and S. V. Bryant. (1995). 
Regulation of HoxA expression in developing and regenerating axolotl 
limbs. Development 121 : 1731-41.
Gasc, J. P. (1976). Snake vertebrae- a mechanism or merely a taxonomist's 
toy? In Morphology and Biology of Reptiles. Edited by A. Bellairs and C. B.
Cox. 177-190.
Gaunt, S. J. (1994). Conservation in the Hox code during morphological 
evolution. Int. J. Dev. biol. 38 : 549-552.
Geduspan, J. S., and J. A. MacCabe. (1989). Transfer of dorsoventral 
information from mesoderm to ectoderm at the onset of limb development. 
Anat Rec 224 : 79-87.
Geduspan, J. S., and M. Solursh. (1992a). Cellular contribution of the 
different regions of the somatopleure to the developing limb. Dev Dyn 195 : 
177-187.
Geduspan, J. S., and M. Solursh. (1992b). A growth-promoting influence 
from the mesonephros during limb outgrowth. Dev Biol 151 : 242-250.
Gibson-Brown, J. J., S. I. Agulnik, D. L. Chapman, M. Alexiou, N. Garvey, L. 
M. Silver, and V. E. Papaioannou. (1996). Evidence of a role for T-Box genes 
in the evolution of limb morphogenesis and specification of forelimb/hindlimb 
identity. Mech. Dev. 56 ; 93-101.
Goodrich, E. S. (1930). Studies on the Structure and Development of 
Vertebrates. London: Macmillan.
Green, P. J., F. S. Walsh, and P. Doherty. (1996). Promiscuity of fibroblast 
growth factor receptors. Bioessays 18 : 639-646.
Greer, A. E. (1989). The Biology and Evolution of Australian Lizards. 
Chipping Norton, NSW: Surrey Beatty and Sons.
Grenier, J. K., T. L. Garber, R. Warren, P. M. Whitington, and S. Carroll. 
(1997). Evolution of the entire arthropod Hox gene set predated the origin 
and radiation of the onychophoran/arthropod clade. Curr Biol 7 : 547-553.
Grieshammer, U., G. Minowada, J. M. Pisenti, U. K. Abbott, and G. R. Martin.
(1996). The chick limbless mutation causes abnormalities in limb bud dorsal- 
ventral patterning: implications for the mechanism of apical ridge formation. 
Development 122 : 3851-61.
Hamburger, V., and H. Hamilton. (1951). A series of normal stages in the
development of the chick embryo. J. Morphol. 88 : 49-92.
Hammerschmidt, M., A. Brook, and A. P. McMahon. (1997). The world 
according to hedgehog. Trends Genet 13 : 14-21.
Hatta, K., R. Bremiler, M. Westerfield, and C. Kimmel. (1991). Diversity of 
expression of engra/Ved-like antigens in zebrafish. Development 112 : 821- 
Hayamizu, T. P., and S. V. Bryant. (1992). Retinoic acid respecifies limb bud 
cells in vitro. J Exp Zool 263 : 423-429.
Hebert, J. M., T. Rosenquist, J. Gotz, and G. R. Martin. (1994). FGF5 as a
regulator of the hair growth cycle: evidence from targeted and spontaneous 
mutations. Cell 78 : 1017-25.
Heikinheimo, M., A. Lawshe, G. M. Shackleford, D. B. Wilson, and 0. A. 
MacArthur. (1994). Fgf-8 expression in the post-gastrulation mouse suggests 
roles in the development of the face, limbs and central nervous system.
Mech Dev 48 : 129-38.
Hill, R. E., P. F. Jones, A. R. Rees, C. M. Sime, M. J. Justice, N. G. Copeland,
N. A. Jenkins, E. Graham, and D. R. Davidson. (1989). A new family of 
mouse homeo box-containing genes: molecular structure, chromosomal 
location, and developmental expression of Hox-7.1. Genes Dev 3 : 26-37.
Hinchliffe, J. R. (1985). 'One, two, three' or 'Two, three, four': An 
embryologist's view of the homologies of the digits and carpus of modern 
birds. In Beginnings of Birds. Edited by M. K. Hecht, J. H. Ostrom, G. Viohl 
and P. Wellnhofer. 141-147. Eichstatt: Jura-Museums.
Hinchliffe, J. R., and A. Sansom. (1985). The distribution of the polarizing 
zone (ZPA) in the legbud of the chick embryo. J Embryol Exp Morphol 86 : 
169-75.
Holland, P. W. H., and J. Garcia-Fernandez. (1996). Hox genes and chordate 
evolution. Dev Biol 173 : 382-95.
Honig, L. S. (1984). Pattern formation during development of the amniote 
limb. In The structure, development and evolution of reptiles. Edited by M. W.
J. Ferguson. 197-222. London: Academic Press.
Honig, L. S., and D. Summerbell. (1985). Maps of strength of positional 
signalling activity in the developing chick wing bud. J Embryol Exp Morphol 
87 : 163-74.
Horan, G. S. B., R. Ramirez-Solis, M. S. Featherstone, D. J. Wolgemuth, A. 
Bradley, and R. R. Behringer. (1995). Compound mutants for the paralogous 
Hoxa-4, Hoxb-4 and Hoxd-4 genes show more complete homeotic 
transformations and a dose-dependent increase in the number of vertebrae 
transformed. Genes Dev 9 : 1667-1677.
Hornbruch, A., and L. Wolpert. (1986). Positional signalling by Hensen's 
node when grafted to the chick limb bud. J Embryol Exp Morphol 94 : 257- 
Hornbruch, A., and L. Wolpert. (1991). The spatial and temporal distribution 
of polarizing activity in the flank of the pre-limb-bud stages in the chick 
embryo. Development 111 : 725-31.
Isaacs, H. V., M. E. Pownall, and J. M. Slack. (1994). eFGF regulates Xbra 
expression during Xenopus gastrulation. Embo J 13 : 4469-81.
Itasaki, N., J. Sharpe, A. Morrison, and R. Krumlauf. (1996). Reprogramming 
Hox expression in the vertebrate hindbrain: influence of paraxial mesoderm 
and rhombomere transposition. Neuron 16 : 487-500.
Harrison, R. G. (1969). Organization and Development of the Embryo. New Haven: 
Yale University Press.
Izpisua-Belmonte, J. C. , J. M. Brown, A. Crawley, D. Duboule, and C. Tickle.
(1992). Hox-4 gene expression in mouse/chicken heterospecific grafts of 
signalling regions to limb buds reveals similarities in patterning 
mechanisms. Development 115 ; 553-60.
Izpisua-Belmonte, J. C., and D. Duboule. (1992). Homeobox genes and 
pattern formation in the vertebrate limb. Dev Biol 152 : 26-36.
Izpisua-Belmonte, J. C. , 0. Tickle, P. Dolle, L. Wolpert, and D. Duboule.
(1991). Expression of the homeobox Hox-4 genes and the specification of 
position in chick wing development. Nature 350 : 585-9.
Jackson, A., S. Friedman, X. Zhan, K. A. Engleka, R. Forough, and T. Maciag.
(1992). Heat shock induces the release of fibroblast growth factor 1 from NIH 
3T3 cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 89 : 10691-5.
Jegalian, B. G., and E. M. De Robertis. (1992). Homeotic transformations in 
the mouse induced by overexpression of a human Hox3.3 transgene. Cell 
71 : 901-910.
Johnson, D. E., P. L. Lee, J. Lu, and L. T. Williams. (1990). Diverse forms of a 
receptor for acidic and basic fibroblast growth factors. Mol Cell Biol 10 : 
4728-36.
Johnson, R. L., and C. Tabin. (1995). The long and short of Hedgehog 
signaling. Cell 81 ; 313-6.
Kappen, C. (1996). Theoretical approaches to the analysis of homeobox 
gene evolution. Comput Chem 20 : 49-59.
Kessel, M. (1992). Respecification of vertebral identities by retinoic acid. 
Development 115 : 487-501.
Kessel, M., and P. Gruss. (1991). Homeotic transformations of murine 
vertebrae and concomitany alteration of Hox codes by retinoic acid. Cell 67 : 
89-104.
Kieny, M. (1971). Les phases d'activit morphogne du msoderme 
somatopleural pendant l dveloppement prcoce du membre chez 
l'embryon de poulet. Ann. Embryol. Morphol. 4 : 281-298.
Kiortsis, V. (1953). Potentialities du territoire patte chez le Triton. Rev Suisse 
Zol ; 30W10.
Klagsbrun, M., and A. Baird. (1991). A dual receptor system is required for 
basic fibroblast growth factor activity. Cell 67 ; 229-231.
Koyama, E., T. Yamaai, S. Iseki, H. Ohuchi, T. Nohno, H. Yoshioka, Y. 
Hayashi, J. L. Leatherman, E. B. Golden, S. Noji, and M. Pacifici. (1996). 
Polarizing activity. Sonic hedgehog, and tooth development in embryonic 
and postnatal mouse. Dev Dyn 206 ; 59-72.
Krumlauf, R. (1992). Evolution of the vertebrate Hox homeobox genes. 
Bioessays 14 : 245-52.
Krumlauf, R. (1994). Hox genes in vertebrate development. Cell 78 : 191- 
Laufer, E., R. Dahn, 0. E. Orozco, C. Y. Yeo, J. Pisenti, D. Henrique, U. K. 
Abbott, J. F. Fallon, and C. Tabin. (1997). Expression of Radical fringe in 
limb-bud ectoderm regulates apical ectodermal ridge formation. Nature 386 : 
366-73.
Laufer, E., 0. E. Nelson, R. L. Johnson, B. A. Morgan, and C. Tabin. (1994). 
Sonic hedgehog and Fgf-4 act through a signaling cascade and feedback 
loop to integrate growth and patterning of the developing limb bud. Cell 79 : 
993-1003.
Lewis, E. (1978). A gene complex controlling segmentation in Drosophila. 
Nature 276 : 565-570.
Li, Q. Y., R. A. Newbury-Ecob, J. A. Terret, D. I. Wilson, A. R. Curtis, C. H. Yi, 
T. Gebuhr, P. J. Bullen, 8. C. Robson, T. Strachan, D. Bonnet, S. Lyonnet, I. 
D. Young, J. A. Raeburn, A. J. Buckler, D. J. Law, and J. D. Brook. (1997). 
Holt-Oram syndrome is caused by mutations in TBX5, a member of the 
Brachyury (T) family. Nature Genetics 15 : 21-29.
Liem, K. F., G. TremmI, H. Roelink, and T. M. Jessell. (1995). Dorsal 
differentiation of neural plate cells induced by BMP-mediated signals from 
epidermal ectoderm. Cell 82 : 969-979.
Locatelli, P. (1924). Sulla formazione di arti sopranumerari. Boll Soc Med- 
Chir Pavia 36
Logan, C., A. Hornbruch, I. Campbell, and A. Lumsden. (1997). The role of 
E ngra iled  in establishing the dorsoventral axis of the chick limb. 
Development 124 ; 2317-24.
Lohnes, D., P. Kastner, A. Dierich, M. Mark, M. LeMeur, and P. Chambon.
(1993). Function of retinoic acid receptor y in the mouse. Cell 73 : 643-658.
Lohnes, D., M. Mark, C. Mendelsohn, P. Dolle, A. Dierich, P. Gorry, A. 
Gansmuller, and P. Chambon. (1994). Function of the retinoic acid receptors 
(RARs) during development (I) Craniofacial and skeletal abnormalities in 
RAR double mutants. Development 120 : 2723-2748.
Loomis, C. A., E. Harris, J. Michaud, W. Wurst, M. Hanks, and A. Joiner.
(1996). The mouse Engrailed-1 gene and ventral limb patterning. Nature 
382 ; 360-363.
Lopez-Martinez, A., D. T. Chang, C. Chiang, J. A. Porter, M. A. Ros, B. K. 
Simandl, P. A. Beachy, and J. F. Fallon. (1995). Limb-patterning activity and 
restricted posterior localization of the amino-terminal product of Sonic 
hedgehog cleavage. Curr. Biol. 5 : 791-796.
Lu. H. C., J. P. Revelli, L. Goering, C. Thaller, and G. Eichele. (1997). 
Retinoid signaling is required for the establishment of a ZPA and for the 
expression of Hoxb-8. a mediator of ZPA formation. Development 124 ; 
1643-51.
Lumsden. A., and R. Krumlauf. (1996). Patterning the vertebrate neuraxis. 
Science 274 : 1109-1115.
Luo. G., C. Hofmann. A. L. J. J. Bronckers. M. Sohocki. A. Bradley, and G. 
Karsenty. (1995). BMP-7 is an inducer of nephrogenesis, and is also 
required for eye development and skeletal patterning. Genes Dev. 9 ; 2808- 
2820.
MacCabe. A. B.. M. I .  Gasseling, and Jw Jr Saunders. (1973). 
Spatiotemporal distribution of mechanisms that control outgrowth and 
anteroposterior polarization of the limb bud in the chick embryo. Mech 
Ageing Dev 2 : 1-12.
MacCabe. J. A.. J. Errick, and J. W. Saunders. (1974). Ectodermal control of 
the dorsoventral axis in the leg bud of the chick embryo. Dev Biol 39 : 69-82.
MacCabe. J. A., and B. W. Parker. (1976). Polarizing activity in the 
developing limb of the Syrian hamster. J Exp Zool 195 : 311-7.
Maden, M. (1993). The homeotic transformation of tails into limbs in Rana 
temporaria by retinoids. Dev Biol 159 : 379-91.
Maden. M.. D. E. Ong, D. Summerbell. and F. Chytil. (1988). Spatial 
distribution of cellular protein binding to retinoic acid in the chick limb bud. 
Nature 335 ; 733-5.
Mansukhani, A.. D. Moscatelli, D. Talarico, V. Levytska, and C. Basilico. 
(1990). A murine fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor expressed in CHO 
cells is activated by basic FGF and Kaposi FGF. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 87 
: 4378-82.
Marcelle. C.. A. Eichmann, 0. Halevy, C. Breant, and N. Le Douarin. (1994). 
Distinct developmental expression of a new avian fibroblast growth factor 
receptor. Development 120 : 683-94.
Marigo. V.. R. A. Davey, Y. Zuo. J. M. Cunningham, and C. J. Tabin. (1996a). 
Biochemical evidence that patched is the Hedgehog receptor. Nature 384 : 
176-9.
Marigo. V.. M. P. Scott. R. L. Johnson. L. V. Goodrich, and C. J. Tabin. 
(1996b). Conservation in hedgehog signaling: induction of a chicken 
patched homolog by Sonic hedgehog in the developing limb. Development 
122 : 1225-33.
Marti. E.. D. A. Bumcrot, R. Takada. and A. P. McMahon. (1995a). 
Requirement of 19K form of Sonic hedgehog for induction of distinct ventral 
cell types in CNS explants. Nature 375 : 322-5.
Marti, E., R. Takada, D. A. Bumcrot, H. Sasaki, and A. P. McMahon. (1995b). 
Distribution of Sonic hedgehog peptides in the developing chick and mouse 
embryo. Development 121 : 2537-47.
Masuya, H., T. Sagai, K. Moriwaki, and I .  Shiroishi. (1997). Multigenic 
control of the localization of the zone of polarizing activity in limb 
morphogenesis in the mouse. Dev Biol 182 : 42-51.
Masuya, H., T. Sagai, S. Wakana, K. Moriwaki, and T. Shiroishi. (1995). A 
duplicated zone of polarizing activity in polydactylous mouse mutants. 
Genes Dev 9 : 1645-53.
McNeil, P. L. (1993). Cellular and molecular adaptations to injurious 
mechanical stress. Trends in Cell Biology 3 : 302-307.
Metscher, A. L., and D. Gospodarowicz. (1979). Mitogenic effect of a growth 
factor derived from myelin on denervated regenerates of newt forelimbs. J 
Exp Zool 207 : 497-503.
Michaud, J. L., F. Lapointe, and N Le Douarin. (1997). The dorsoventral 
polarity of the presumptive limb is determined by signals produced by the 
somites and by the lateral somatopleure. Development 124 : 1453-63.
Mignatti, P., and D. B. Rifkin. (1991). Release of basic fibroblast growth 
factor, an angiogenic factor devoid of secretory signal sequence: a trivial 
phenomenon or a novel secretion mechanism? J Cell Biochem 47 : 201-7.
Miki, T., D. P. Bottaro, T. P. Fleming, C. L. Smith, W. H. Burgess, A. M. Chan, 
and S. A. Aaronson. (1992). Determination of ligand-binding specificity by 
alternative splicing: two distinct growth factor receptors encoded by a single 
gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 8 A 89 : 246-50.
Mohanty-Hejmadi, P., S. K. Dutta, and P. Mahapatra. (1992). Limbs 
generated at site of tail amputation in marbled balloon frog after vitamin A 
treatment. Nature 355 : 352-3.
Molven, A., C. V. E. Wright, R. BreMiller, E. De Robertis, and C. Kimmel. 
(1990). Expression of a homeobox gene product in normal and mutant 
zebrafish embryos: evolution of the tetrapod body plan. Development 109 : 
279-288.
Morgan, B. A., J. C. Izpisua-Belmonte, D. Duboule, and C. J. Tabin. (1992). 
Targeted misexpression of Hox-4.6 in the avian limb bud causes apparent 
homeotic transformations. Nature 358 : 236-9.
Morgan, B. A., and C. Tabin. (1994). Hox genes and growth: early and late 
roles in limb bud morphogenesis. Development Supplement : 181-6.
Morrison, A., M. C. Moroni, McNaughton L. Ariza, R. Krumlauf, and F. Mavilio.
(1996). In vitro and transgenic analysis of a human H0XD4 retinoid- 
responsive enhancer. Development 122 : 1895-907.
Mullen, L. M., S. V. Bryant, M. A. Torok, B. Blumberg, and D. M. Gardiner.
(1996). Nerve dependency of regeneration: the role of Distal-less and FGF 
signaling in amphibian limb regeneration. Development 122 : 3487-97.
Muller, G. B., J. Streicher, and R. J. Muller. (1996). Homeotic duplication of 
the pelvic body segment in regenerating tadpole tails induced by retinoic 
acid. Dev Genes Evol 206 : 344-348.
Nelson, C. E., B. A. Morgan, A. C. Burke, E. Laufer, E. DiMambro, L. C. 
Murtaugh, E. Gonzales, L. Tessarollo, L. F. Parada, and C. Tabin. (1996). 
Analysis of Hox gene expression in the chick limb bud. Development 122 : 
1449-66.
Niederreither, K., S. J. Ward, P. Dolle, and P. Chambon. (1996). 
Morphological and molecular characterization of retinoic acid-induced limb 
duplications in mice. Dev Biol 176 : 185-98.
Nieto, M. A., K. Patel, and D. G. Wilkinson. (1996). In situ hybridization 
analysis of chick embryos in whole-mount and tissue sections. In Methods in 
Avian Embryology. Edited by M. Bronner-Fraser. San Diego: Academic 
Press.
Niswander, L., 8. Jeffrey, G. R. Martin, and 0. Tickle. (1994). A positive 
feedback loop coordinates growth and patterning in the vertebrate limb. 
Nature 371 : 609-12.
Niswander, L., and G. R. Martin. (1992). Fgf-4 expression during gastrulation, 
myogenesis, limb and tooth development in the mouse. Development 114 : 
755-68.
Niswander, L., and G. R. Martin. (1993). FGF-4 and BMP-2 have opposite 
effects on limb growth. Nature 361 : 68-71.
Niswander, L., 0. Tickle, A. Vogel, I. Booth, and G. R. Martin. (1993). FGF-4 
replaces the apical ectodermal ridge and directs outgrowth and patterning of 
the limb. Cell 75 : 579-87.
Nohno, T., Y. Kawakami, H. Ohuchi, A. Fujiwara, H. Yoshioka, and S. Noji. 
(1995). Involvement of the Sonic hedgehog gene in chick feather formation. 
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 206 : 33-9.
Noji, S., T. Nohno, E. Koyama, K. Muto, K. Ohyama, Y. Aoki, K. Tamura, K. 
Ohsugi, H. ide, S. Taniguchi, and a. I. et. (1991). Retinoic acid induces 
polarizing activity but is unlikely to be a morphogen in the chick limb bud. 
Nature 350 : 83-6.
Noramly. S., J. Pisenti, U. Abbott, and B. Morgan. (1996). Gene expression in 
the limbless mutant: polarized gene expression in the absence of Shh and 
an AER. Dev Biol 179 : 339-46.
Ohuchi, H., T. Nakagawa, A. Yamamoto, A. Araga, T. Ohata, Y. Ishimaru, H. 
Yoshioka, T. Kuwana, T. Nohno, M. Yamasaki, N. Itoh, and S. Noji. (1997). 
The mesenchymal factor, FGF10, initiates and maintains the outgrowth of the 
chick limb bud through interaction with FGF8, an apical ectodermal factor.
Development 124 : 2235-44.
Ohuchi, H., H. Yoshioka, A. Tanaka, Y. Kawakami, T. Nohno, and S. Noji.
(1994). Involvement of androgen-induced growth factor (FGF-8) gene in 
mouse embryogenesis and morphogenesis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 
204 : 882-8.
Oliver, G., 0. V. Wright, J. Hardwicke, and E. M. De Robertis. (1988a). 
Differential antero-posterior expression of two proteins encoded by a 
homeobox gene in Xenopus and mouse embryos. Embo J 7 ; 3199-209.
Oliver, G., 0. V. Wright, J. Hardwicke, and E. M De Robertis. (1988b). A 
gradient of homeodomain protein in developing forelimbs of Xenopus and 
mouse embryos. Cell 55 : 1017-24.
Ornitz, D. M., J. Xu, J. S. Colvin, D. G. McEwen, C. A. MacArthur, F. Coulier, 
G. Gao, and M. Goldfarb. (1996). Receptor specificity of the fibroblast growth 
factor family. J Biol Chem 271 : 15292-7.
Orr-Urtreger, A., M. T. Bedford, I .  Burakova, E. Arman, Y. Zimmer, A. Yayon, 
D. Givol, and P. Lonai. (1993). Developmental localization of the splicing 
alternatives of fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 (FGFR2). Dev Biol 158 ; 
475-86.
Orr-Urtreger, A., D. Givol, A. Yayon, Y. Yarden, and P. Lonai. (1991). 
Developmental expression of two murine fibroblast growth factor receptors, 
fig and bek. Development 113 : 1419-34.
Panganiban, G., A. Sebring, L. Nagy, and S. Carroll. (1995). The 
development of crustacean limbs and the evolution of arthropods. Science 
270 : 1363-6.
Parr, B. A., and A. P. McMahon. (1995). Dorsalizing signal Wnt-7a required 
for normal polarity of D-V and A-P axes of mouse limb. Nature 374 : 350-3.
Parr, B. A., M. J. Shea, G. Vassileva, and A. P. McMahon. (1993). Mouse Wnt 
genes exhibit discrete domains of expression in the early embryonic CNS 
and limb buds. Development 119 : 247-61.
Patel, K., R. Nittenberg, D. D'Souza, C. Irving, D. Burt, D. G. Wilkinson, and 
C. Tickle. (1996). Expression and regulation of Cek-8, a cell to cell signalling 
receptor in developing chick limb buds. Development 122 : 1147-55.
Pendleton, J. W., B. K. Nagai, M. T. Murtha, and F. H. Ruddle. (1993). 
Expansion of the Hox gene family and the evolution of chordates. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 90 : 6300-4.
Peters, K., S. Werner, X. Liao, S. Wert, J. Whitsett, and L. Williams. (1994). 
Targeted expression of a dominant negative FGF receptor blocks branching 
morphogenesis and epithelial differentiation of the mouse lung. Embo J 13 : 
3296-301.
Peters, K. G., S. Werner, G. Chen, and L. T. Williams. (1992). Two FGF
receptor genes are differentially expressed in epithelial and mesenchymal 
tissues during limb formation and organogenesis in the mouse. 
Development 114 : 233-43.
Pollock, R. A., G. Jay, and C. J. Bieberich. (1992). Altering the boundaries of 
Hox-3.1: evidence for antipodal gene regulation. Cell 71 : 911-924.
Porter, J. A., K. E. Young, and P. A. Beachy. (1996). Cholesterol modification 
of hedgehog signaling proteins in animal development. Science 274 ; 255-9.
Pownall, M. E., A. S. Tucker, J. M. Slack, and H. V. Isaacs. (1996). eFGF, 
Xcad3 and Hox genes form a molecular pathway that establishes the 
anteroposterior axis in Xenopus. Development 122 ; 3881-92.
Prince, V. E., L. Joly, M. Ekker, and R. K. Ho. (1997). Zebrafish Hox genes: 
genomic organization and modified colinear expression of trunk genes. 
Development. : In press.
Rahmani, T. M. Z. (1974). Morphogenesis of the rudimentary hind-limb of the 
glass snake {Ophisaurus apodus Pallas). J. Embryol Exp Morphol 32 : 431- 
Rancourt, D. E., T. Tsuzuki, and M. R. Capecchi. (1995). Genetic interaction 
between Hoxb-5 and Hoxb-6 is revealed by nonallelic noncomplementation. 
Genes Dev 9 : 108-22.
Raynaud, A. (1977). Somites and early morphogenesis in reptile limbs. In 
Vertebrate Limb and Somite Morphogenesis. Edited by D. A. Ede, J. R. 
Hinchliffe and M. Balls. 373-386. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Raynaud, A. (1985). Development of limbs and embryonic limb reduction. In 
Biology of the Reptilia. Edited by C. Gans. 60-147. New York: John Wiley 
and Sons.
Raynaud, A. (1990). Developmental mechanisms involved in the embryonic 
reduction of imbs in reptiles. Int J Dev Biol 34 : 233-243.
Raynaud, A., P. Kan, G. Bouche, and A. M. Duprat. (1995). Fibroblast growth 
factors (FGF-2) and delayed involution of the posterior limbs of the slow- 
worm embryo (Anguis fragilis, L). C R Acad Sci lii 318 : 573-8.
Riddle, R. D., M. Ensini, C. Nelson, T. Tsuchida, I .  M. Jessell, and C. Tabin.
(1995). Induction of LIM homeobox gene Lmx-1 by WNT7a establishes 
dorsoventral pattern in the vertebrate limb. Cell 83 : 631-640.
Riddle, R. D., R. L. Johnson, E. Laufer, and C. Tabin. (1993). Sonic 
hedgehog mediates the polarizing activity of the ZPA. Cell 75 : 1401-16.
Rieppel, 0. (1988). The Classification of the Squamata. In The Phylogeny 
and Classification of the Tetrapods. Edited by M. J. Benton. 261-294.
Rijli, F. M., and P. Chambon. (1997). Genetic interactions of Hox genes in 
limb development: learning from compound mutants. Curr Opin Genet Dev 7
: 481-487.
Roberts, D. J., R. L. Johnson, A. C. Burke, C. E. Nelson, B. A. Morgan, and C. 
Tabin. (1995). Sonic hedgehog is an endodermal signal inducing Bmp-4 
and Hox genes during induction and regionalization of the chick hindgut. 
Development 121 ; 3163-74.
Rodriguez-Esteban, C., J. W. R. Schwabe, J. De la Pena, B. Foys, B. 
Eshelman, and J. C. Izpisua-Belmonte. (1997). Radical fringe positions the 
apical ectodermal ridge at the dorsoventral boundary of the vertebrate limb. 
Nature 386 ; 360-366.
Romer, A. S. (1956). Osteology of the Reptiles. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Romer, A. S. (1966). Vertebrate Paleontology. Third ed. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Ros, M. A., A. Lopez-Martinez, B. K. Simandl, C. Rodriguez, J. C. Izpisua- 
Belmonte, R. Dahn, and J. F. Fallon. (1996). The limb field mesoderm 
determines initial limb bud anteroposterior asymmetry and budding 
independent of sonic hedgehog or apical ectodermal gene expressions. 
Development 122 : 2319-30.
Ross, R. A. (1990). The Reproductive Husbandry of Pythons and Boas. 
Stanford: Institute for Herpetological Research.
Rudnick, D. (1945). Limb forming potencies of the chick blastoderm: 
Including notes on associated trunk structures. Trans Conn Acad Sci 36 : 
353-377.
Ruiz i Altaba, A., and D. A. Melton. (1989). Interaction between peptide 
growth factors and homoeobox genes in the establishment of antero
posterior polarity in frog embryos. Nature 341 : 33-8.
Rutledge, J. C., A. G. Shourbaji, L. A. Hughes, J. E. Polifka, Y. P. Cruz, J. B. 
Bishop, and W. M. Generoso. (1994). Limb and lower-body duplications 
induced by retinoic acid in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91 : 5436-40.
Saunders, Jw Jr, and C. Reuss. (1974). Inductive and axial properties of 
prospective wing-bud mesoderm in the chick embryo. Dev Biol 38 : 41-50.
Saunders, J. W. (1948). The proximo-distal sequence of origin of the parts of 
the chick wing and the role of the ectoderm. J. Exp. Zool. 108 : 363-402.
Saunders, J. W., and M. T. Gasseling. (1968). Ectodermal-mesenchymal 
interactions in the origin of limb symmetry. In Epithelial Mesenchymal 
Interactions. Edited by R. Fleischmajer and R. Billingham. 78-97. Baltimore: 
Williams and Wilkins.
Savage, M. P., C. E. Hart, B. B. Riley, J. Sasse, B. B. Olwin, and J. F. Fallon.
(1993). Distribution of FGF-2 suggests it has a role in chick limb bud growth. 
Dev Dyn 198 : 159-70.
Schulte-Merker, S., and J. C. Smith. (1995). Mesoderm formation in 
response to Brachyury requires FGF signalling. Curr Biol 5 : 62-7.
Scott, W. J. Jr, R. Walter, G. Tzimas, J. O. Sass, H. Nau, and M. D. Collins.
(1994). Endogenous status of retinoids and their cytosolic binding proteins in 
limb buds of chick vs mouse embryos. Dev Biol 165 : 397-409.
Searls, R. C., and M. Y. Janners. (1971). The initiation of limb bud outgrowth 
in the embryonic chick. Dev. Biol. 24 : 198-213.
Sharman, A. C., and P. W. H. Holland. (1996). Conservation, duplication and 
divergence of developmental genes during chordate evolution. Netherlands 
Journal of Zoology 46 : 46-67.
Shashikant, C. S., C. J. Bieberich, H. G. Belting, J. C. H. Wang, M. A. Borbly, 
and F. H. Ruddle. (1995). Regulation of Hoxc-8 during mouse embryonic 
development: identification and characterization of critical elements involved 
in early neural tube expression. Development 121 : 4339-4347.
Shubin, N., C. Tabin, and S. Carroll. (1997). Fossils, genes and the evolution 
of animal limbs. Nature 388 : 639-48.
Simon, J. (1995). Locking in stable states of gene expression: transcriptional 
control during Drosophila development. Curr. Opin. Cell biol. 7 : 376-385.
Singh, G., D. M. Supp, C. Schreiner, J. McNeish, H. J. Merker, N. G. 
Copeland, N. A. Jenkins, S. S. Potter, and W. J. Scott. (1991). legless 
insertional mutation: morphological, molecular, and genetic characterization. 
Genes Dev 5 : 2245-2255.
Slack, J. M. (1976). Determination of polarity in the amphibian limb. Nature 
261 : 44-6.
Slack, J. M. (1977a). Determination of anteroposterior polarity in the axolotl 
forelimb by an interaction between limb and flank rudiments. J Embryol Exp 
Morphol 39 : 151-68.
Slack, J. M. W. (1977b). Control of anteroposterior pattern in the axolotl 
forelimb by a smoothly graded signal. J Embryol Exp Morphol 39 : 169-182.
Slack, J. M. W. (1980). Regulation and potency in the forelimb rudiment of 
the axolotl embryo. J Embryol Exp Morphol 57 : 203-217.
Smith, J. C. (1979). Evidence for a positional memory in the development of 
the chick wing bud. J Embryol Exp Morphol 52 : 105-13.
Smith, J. C. (1980). The time required for the positional signalling in the 
chick wing bud. J Embryol Exp Morphol 60 : 321-328.
Sordino, P., and D. Duboule. (1996). A molecular approach to the evolution 
of vertebrate paired appendages. Trends Evol Ecol 11 : 114-119.
Sordino, P., F. van der Hoeven, and D. Duboule. (1995). Hox gene 
expression in teleost fins and the origin of vertebrate digits. Nature 375 : 
678-81.
Stephens, T. D., and T. R. McNulty. (1981). Evidence for a metameric pattern 
in the development of the chick humerus. J Embryol Exp Morphol 61 : 191- 
Stephens, T. ., R. Spall, W. C. Baker, S. R. Hiatt, D. E. Pugmire, M. R. 
Shaker, H. J. Willis, and K. P. Winger. (1991). Axial and paraxial influences 
on limb morphogenesis. J Morph 208 ; 367-379.
Stocum, D. L., and J. F. Fallon. (1984). Mechanisms of polarization and 
pattern formation in urodele limb ontogeny; a polarizing zone model. In 
Pattern formation: a primer in developmental biology. Edited by G. M. 
Malacinski and S. V. Bryant. London: MacMillan.
Stratford, T., C. Horton, and M. Maden. (1996). Retinoic acid is required for 
the initiation of outgrowth in the chick limb bud. Curr Biol 6 : 1124-33.
Stratford, T. H., K. Kostakopoulou, and M. Maden. (1997). Hoxb-8 has a role 
in establishing early anteroposterior polarity in chick forelimb but not 
hindlimb. Development in press
Suemori, H., N Takahashi, and S. Noguchi. (1995). Hoxc-9 mutant mice 
show anterior transformation of the vertebrae and malformation of the 
sternum and ribs. Mech Dev 51 : 265-273.
Summerbell, D. (1974). A quantitative analysis of the effect of excision of the 
AER from the chick limb-bud. J Embryol Exp Morphol 32 : 651-60.
Summerbell, D., J. H. Lewis, and L. Wolpert. (1973). Positional information in 
chick limb morphogenesis. Nature 244 : 492-6.
Tabin, 0. J. (1992). Why we have (only) five fingers per hand: Hox genes 
and the evolution of paired hands. Development 116 : 289-296.
Tanaka, M., K. Tamura, S. Noji, T. Nohno, and H. Ide. (1997). Induction of 
additional limb at the dorsal-ventral boundary of a chick embryo. Dev Biol 
182 : 191-203.
Thaller, 0., and G. Eichele. (1987). Identification and spatial distribution of 
retinoids in the developing chick limb bud. Nature 327 : 625-8.
Thesleff, I., A. Vaahtokari, and A. -M. Partanen. (1995). Regulation of 
organogenesis: common molecular mechanisms regulating the
development of teeth and other organs. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 39 : 39-50.
Thisse, B., 0. Thisse, and J. Weston. (1995). Novel FGF receptor (Z-FGFR4) 
is dynamically expressed in mesoderm and neurectoderm during early 
zebrafish embryogenesis. Dev. Dyn. 203 : 377-391.
Thomas, K.H. (1993). Biochemistry and molecular biology of fibroblast
growth factors. In Neurotrophic Factors. Edited by S. E. Loughlin and J. H. 
Fallon. London: Academic Press.
Thorogood, P., and P. Ferretti. (1993). Hox genes, fin folds and symmetry. 
Nature 364 : 196.
Tickle, C. (1981). The number of polarizing region cells required to specify 
additional digits in the developing chick wing. Nature 289 : 295-8.
Tickle, C., B. Alberts, L. Wolpert, and J. Lee. (1982). Local application of 
retinoic acid to the limb bond mimics the action of the polarizing region. 
Nature 296 : 564-6.
Tickle, C., J. Lee, and G. Eichele. (1985). A quantitative analysis of the effect 
of all-trans-retinoic acid on the pattern of chick wing development. Dev Biol 
109 : 82-95.
Tickle, C., G. Shellswell, A. Crawley, and L. Wolpert. (1976). Positional 
signalling by mouse limb polarising region in the chick wing bud. Nature 259 
: 396-7.
Tickle, C., D. Summerbell, and L. Wolpert. (1975). Positional signalling and 
specification of digits in chick limb morphogenesis. Nature 254 : 199-202.
Vachon, G., B. Cohen, C. Pfeifle, M. E. McGuffin, J. Botas, and S. M. Cohen.
(1992). Homeotic genes of the Bithorax complex repress limb development 
in the abdomen of the Drosophila embryo through the target gene Distal- 
less. Cell 71 : 437-50.
van der Hoeven, F., P. Sordino, N. Fraudeau, J. C. Izpisua-Belmonte, and D. 
Duboule. (1996). Teleost HoxD and HoxA genes: comparison with tetrapods 
and functional evolution of the HOXD complex. Mech Dev 54 : 9-21.
Vargesson, N., J. D. Clarke, K. Vincent, C. Coles, L. Wolpert, and C. Tickle.
(1997). Cell fate in the chick limb bud and relationship to gene expression. 
Development 124 : 1909-18.
Vogel, A., Clarke D. Roberts, and L. Niswander. (1995). Effect of FGF on 
gene expression in chick limb bud cells in vivo and in vitro. Dev Biol 171 : 
507-20.
Vogel, A., C. Rodriguez, and J. C. Izpisua-Belmonte. (1996). Involvement of 
FGF-8 in initiation, outgrowth and patterning of the vertebrate limb. 
Development 122 : 1737-50.
Vogel, A., C. Rodriguez, W. Warnken, and J. C. Izpisua-Belmonte. (1995). 
Dorsal cell fate specified by chick Lmxl during vertebrate limb development. 
Nature 378 : 716-20.
Vogel, A., and C. Tickle. (1993). FGF-4 maintains polarizing activity of 
posterior limb bud cells in vivo and in vitro. Development 119 : 199-206.
Wagner, M., C. Thaller, T. Jessell, and G. Eichele. (1990). Polarizing activity
and retinoid synthesis in the floor plate of the neural tube. Nature 345 : 819- 
Wall, N. A., and B. L. M. Hogan. (1995). Expression of bone morphogenetic 
protein-4 (BMP-4), bone morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP-7), fibroblast growth 
factor-8 (FGF-8) and sonic hedgehog (SHH) during branchial arch 
development in the chick. Mech. Dev. 53 : 383-392.
Wall, N. A., C. M. Jones, B. L. Hogan, and C. V. Wright. (1992). Expression 
and modification of Hox 2.1 protein in mouse embryos. Mech Dev 37 : H I -  
Warren, R. W., L. Nagy, J. Selegue, J. Gates, and S. Carroll. (1994). 
Evolution of homeotic gene regulation and function in flies and butterflies. 
Nature 372 : 458-461.
Werner, S., D. S. R. Duan, C. De Vries, K. P. Peters, D. Johnson, and L. T. 
Williams. (1992). Differential splicing in the extracellular region of fibroblast 
growth factor receptor 1 generates receptor variants with different ligand- 
binding affinities. Mol Cell Biol 12 : 82-88.
Wilde, S. M., S. E. Wedden, and C. Tickle. (1987). Retinoids reprogramme 
pre-bud mesenchyme to give changes in limb pattern. Development 100 : 
723-733.
Wilkinson, D. G., S. Bhatt, and A. P. McMahon. (1989). Expression pattern of 
the FGF-related proto-oncogene int-2 suggests multiple roles in fetal 
development. Development 105 ; 131-6.
Wolpert, L. (1969). Positional information and the spatial pattern of 
cellular differentiation. J Theor Biol 25 : 1-47.
Wolpert, L. (1996). One hundred years of positional information. Trends 
Genet 12 : 359-64.
Yang, Y., G. Drossopoulou, P. T. Chuang, D. Duprez, E. Marti, D. Bumcrot, N. 
Vargesson, J. Clarke, L. Niswander, A. McMahon, and C. Tickle. (1997). 
Relationship between dose, distance and time in Sonic Hedgehog-mediaied 
regulation of anteroposterior polarity in the chick limb. Development 124 ; 
4393-4404.
Yang, Y., and L. Niswander. (1995). Interaction between the signaling 
molecules WNT7a and SHH during vertebrate limb development: dorsal 
signals regulate anteroposterior patterning. Cell 80 : 939-47.
Yayon, A., M. Klagsbrun, J. D. Esko, P. Leder, and D. M. Ornitz. (1991). Cell 
surface, heparin-like molecules are required for binding of basic fibroblast 
growth factor to its high affinity receptor. Cell 64 : 841-8.
Yokouchi, Y., S. Nakazato, M. Yamamoto, Y. Goto, T. Kameda, H. Iba, and A. 
Kuroiwa. (1995). Misexpression of Hoxa-13 induces cartilage homeotic 
transformation and changes cell adhesiveness in chick limb buds. Genes 
Dev 9 : 2509-22.
Yonei, S., K. Tamura, K. Ohsugi, and H. Ide. p995). MRC-5 cells induce the 
AER prior to the duplicated pattern formation in chick limb bud. Dev Biol 170 
: 542-52.
Yu, B. D., J. L. Hess, S. E. Horning, G. A. J. Brown, and S.J. Korsmeyer.
(1995). Altered Hox expression and segmental identity in M//-mutant mice. 
Nature 378 : 505-508.
Zeltser, L., C. Desplan, and N. Heintz. (1996). Hoxb-13: a new Hox gene in a 
distant region of the HOXB cluster maintains colinearity. Development 122 : 
2475-84.
Zwilling, E. (1956a). Interaction between limb bud ectoderm and mesoderm 
in the chick embryo. II. Experimental limb duplication. J Exp Zool 132 : 173- 
Zwilling, E. (1956b). Interaction between limb bud ectoderm and mesoderm 
in the chick embryo. IV. Experiments with a wingless mutant. J Exp Zool 132 : 
241-253.
