Division of Materials, Mechanics and Structures 
MULTI-SCALE MODELLING OF POLYMER 
COMPOSITE MATERIALS AT HIGH RATES OF 
STRAIN 
Mark Jonathan Lidgett 
MEng (Hons) 
Thesis submitted to the University of Nottingham 
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
August 2012
Contents 
Abstract 
The overall objective of this thesis was to develop a methodology for 
predicting the high strain rate properties of macro scale polymer composite 
materials through micro and meso scale finite element modelling.   
The focus in this study was on multi-layered multi-material polymer 
composite laminates consisting of 0/90 and  45 layers of either; S2 
Glass/Epoxy or Carbon/Epoxy non crimp fabric. 
A multi-scale finite element modelling methodology was developed at the 
micro and meso scale for predicting the elastic response, damage initiation, 
damage evolution and strain rate dependence of macro scale polymer 
composite materials.  The methodology was implemented in the Abaqus 
finite element package utilising Python scripting for simulation definition 
and Fortran code for user defined explicit material subroutines. 
Micro scale unit cells were tested in longitudinal, transverse and shear 
loading directions over a range of strain rates.  The results of the micro 
scale testing were converted into material properties of the meso scale 
yarns / tows.  Meso scale unit cells were tested in in-plane, through 
thickness and shear loading directions over of a range of strain rates.  The 
results of the meso scale testing were converted into material properties of 
macro scale polymer composite materials. 
The modelling methodology was validated against experimental testing 
conducted on meso scale samples over a range of strain rates using an 
electromechanical universal static test machine and an instrumented falling 
weight drop tower. 
The contribution to knowledge from this study is the development of a 
validated modelling methodology for predicting the elastic, damage and 
strain rate dependent response of polymer composite materials at a micro 
and meso scale. 
Acknowledgements 
The author would like to thank Dr Richard Brooks and Prof Nicholas Warrior 
for their supervision throughout the entirety of this project. 
This study was financially supported by the UK Engineering and Physical 
Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) through the Nottingham Innovative 
Manufacturing Research Centre (NIMRC) and the Technology Strategy 
Board (TSB) through contract reference TP/8/MAT/6/I/Q1576E.  
Partners in the TSB funded Lightweight Materials and Structures for Blast 
and Ballistic Survivability (LiMBS) project are thanked for their support: 
Aigis Blast Protection, BAE Systems, BAE Systems Surface Ships, MIRA, 
Permali, QinetiQ, Sigmatex and TPS. 
Thank you to all the members of the Polymer Composites Research Group 
at The University of Nottingham. 
Finally, thanks to my girlfriend, family and friends for their continued 
support and encouragement throughout my work. 
Abbreviations and Notations 
2D  Two Dimensional 
3D  Three Dimensional 
ACAVP  Advanced Composite Armoured Vehicle Platform 
AFV  Armoured Fighting Vehicle 
AISI  American Iron and Steel Institute     
ASI  Abaqus Scripting Interface 
CAE  Computer Aided Engineering 
CAFV  Carbon Fibre for Armoured Fighting Vehicles 
DS  Dassault Systmes 
EPSRC  Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
FE  Finite Element 
FEA  Finite Element Analysis 
FEM  Finite Element Method 
FSP  Fragment Simulating Projectile 
GIM  Group Interaction Modelling 
GUI  Graphical User Interface 
HPC  High Performance Computer 
IED  Improvised Explosive Device 
JIEDDO Joint Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Organization 
LiMBS Lightweight Materials and Structures for Blast and Ballistic 
Survivability 
MoD  Ministry of Defence 
NCF  Non Crimp Fabric 
NIMRC  Nottingham Innovative Manufacturing Research Centre 
PE4  Plastic Explosive 
ROM  Rule of Mixtures 
RUC  Representative Unit Cell 
RVE  Representative Volume Element 
S2 A grade of glass fibre that offers increased stiffness, 
strength, toughness and impact performance [1]. 
SEM  Scanning Electron Microscope 
TSB  Technology Strategy Board 
UD  Unidirectional 
UHMWPE Ultra High Molecular Weight Poly-Ethylene 
    Quasi Static Reference Strain Rate 
   Strain Rate 
Ao  Quasi Static Parameter 
ART  Rate Adjusted Parameter 
CXX  Stiffness Constant for XX direction 
CA  Strain Rate Scaling Constant for Parameter A 
E  Stiffness 
emax  Largest Value of Maximum Stress Criteria 
f  Fibre Volume Fraction 
G  Shear Stiffness 
h  Separation of Fibres at Micro Scale 
ln  Natural Log 
m  Strain Softening Parameter 
p  Row of Matrix 
q  Column of Matrix 
R Closest Centre to Centre Spacing of Fibres at Micro Scale 
(when multiplied by 2) 
r  Radius 
v  Poissons Ratio 
Vf  Volume Fraction 
wt%  Weight Percent 
  Strain 
  Stress 
  Damage Variable 
x, y, z  Coordinate Axes 
u, v, w  Displacement in x, y, z Coordinate Axes 
i, j ,k  Periods in x, y, z Coordinate Axes 
- 1 - 
1 Introduction 
1.1 Background 
In a 2010 annual report by the Joint Improvised Explosive Device Defeat 
Organization (JIEDDO) [2] it is stated that improvised explosive devices 
(IED) continue to pose the main threat to coalition forces in both 
Afghanistan and Iraq.  From October 2009 to October 2010 there were 
19393 civilian, security force and coalition force IED casualties (wounded 
and killed in action) in Afghanistan and Iraq combined [2].  The alarming 
effectiveness of this weapon is due to the insurgents understanding of the 
coalition forces need to use convoys of vehicles to supplement troops 
fighting on the front line.  The placement of IEDs by the roadside to disrupt 
these convoys has become a common tactic indicated by the 15218 
effective and ineffective IED attacks that occurred from January 2010 to 
September 2010 in Afghanistan and Iraq [2].  Many vehicles that travel in 
these convoys do not offer adequate protection from IED explosions, such 
as the controversial Snatch Land Rover [3], and if they do it is often at the 
expense of reducing mobility in action, fuel efficiency and engine service 
life due to heavy conventional steel, aluminium or hard metal armour.  To 
address these issues there has been an increased interest in fibre 
reinforced polymer composite materials for military vehicle armour due to 
their key advantages: 
 High stiffness 
 High strength 
 Low density 
 High strength to weight ratio 
 Good corrosion resistance 
 Easy to transport, handle and install 
 Good opportunities for optimised performance by varying 
reinforcements and matrices 
 Good retrofitting opportunities 
There have been several examples of composite materials being used as 
armour in military vehicles.  The majority of Armoured Fighting Vehicles 
- 2 - 
(AFV) in current military service have spall liners made from composite 
materials.  Spall is small fragments of material that have detached from a 
larger body in the vehicle due to rapid deformation, usually from a blast or 
ballistic event.  Spall can travel at high speeds effectively creating 
dangerous ballistic projectiles.  Spall liners are used to line the interior of 
the vehicle to protect against occupant injury.  The Force Protection Ocelot, 
which is known as the Foxhound in British military service, is a light 
protected patrol vehicle with specialised protection again IEDs.  This 
specialised protection comes in the form a V shaped hull, to focus blasts 
away from the vehicle, and advanced composite materials.  The confidence 
in this composite material military vehicle is demonstrated by the Ministry 
of Defence (MoD) who have signed a 180m contract for 200 new patrol 
vehicles to replace the Snatch Land Rover [4].  French and Wright [5] 
detailed the use of glass fibre composites materials for the hull of an AFV 
called the Advanced Composite Armoured Vehicle Platform (ACAVP).  In 
this programme the composite hull acted as both a structural and blast / 
ballistic protective material.  The structural requirements were to carry the 
loads from the suspension and associated equipment and the blast / 
ballistic requirements were to provide the adequate level of occupant 
protection.  The major conclusion from this study was that to make 
significant weight savings the use of carbon fibre composites should be 
considered in place of glass fibre composites in multi-layered multi-
material structures. 
The inclusion of composite materials in military vehicles is clearly on the 
increase which brings about new challenges for engineers.  The composite 
materials need to go through rigorous, time consuming and expensive 
experimental blast and ballistic trials to ensure an adequate level of 
protection is offered to military personnel.  This has brought forward the 
development of computational simulations of the response of composite 
materials to blast and ballistic loading to reduce the amount of 
experimental trails required and aid in the design process.  These 
simulations, however, are not straightforward and often require a multitude 
of composite material properties which would normally be obtained from an 
experimental material characterisation programme, such as that conducted 
by Brown et al [6].  Multi-scale finite element (FE) modelling has the 
capability to provide these material properties computationally which would 
- 3 - 
reduce, and in some circumstances completely remove, the need for an 
experimental material characterisation programme.   
Hierarchical multi-scale finite element modelling, where there is an 
information transfer from the smaller length scale to the larger length 
scale, is prevalent in composite material modelling.  This thesis focuses on 
modelling composite materials at the micro and meso scale where there is 
an information transfer, in the form of material properties, between the 
micro and meso scale.  At the micro scale, fibres are embedded in a matrix 
material to form a yarn or tow i.e. a fibre bundle.  At the meso scale, yarns 
are arranged in a desired architecture, e.g. non-crimped or plain weave, 
and embedded in a matrix material.  The results of the meso scale 
modelling will provide macro scale material properties where the macro 
scale consists of several meso scale laminae, comprising a repeated yarn 
structure, which are stacked to form a composite laminate. 
1.2 Objectives and Scope 
The overall objective of this thesis is to develop a methodology for 
predicting the high strain rate properties of macro scale polymer composite 
materials through micro and meso scale finite element modelling.  The 
multi-scale modelling methodology to be presented will be applicable for 
many types of composite materials but the focus in this study will be on 
multi-layered multi-material polymer composite laminates consisting of 
0/90 and  45 layers of either; S2 Glass/Epoxy or Carbon/Epoxy non crimp 
fabric. 
1.3 Thesis Layout 
This thesis is comprised of seven chapters.  Following this introduction the 
chapter by chapter thesis layout is as follows: 
Chapter 2 contains a review of the literature which has been split into three 
main areas.  Firstly a brief review on the general characteristics of polymer 
composite materials is presented.  Secondly the experimental 
characterisation of composite materials is detailed with reference to three 
types of testing; low, medium and high strain rate.  Finally the state of the 
art in multi-scale finite element modelling of composite materials is 
- 4 - 
presented.  Examples of modelling at the micro, meso and macro scale are 
given to envisage the modelling approach adopted in this thesis. 
Chapter 3 details the modelling methodology for the micro and meso scale.  
Attention is paid to the definition and generation of unit cells, the 
derivation and application of periodic boundary conditions based on 
translational symmetry and the constituent material models. 
Chapter 4 presents the micro scale modelling results in longitudinal, 
transverse and shear loading over a range of strain rates.  The discussion 
of these results, as well as some parametric studies, is also included in this 
section. 
Chapter 5 presents the meso scale modelling results in in-plane, through 
thickness and shear loading over a range of strain rates.  The discussion of 
these results, as well as some parametric studies, is also included in this 
section. 
Chapter 6 presents the experimental validation of the previous two 
chapters of modelling.  The experimental testing is limited to in-plane 
tension, compression and shear testing over a range of strain rates on 
meso scale non-crimp fabric (NCF) cross-ply laminates.  Details of the 
experimental methods in terms of material specification and test methods 
are also presented. 
Chapter 7 presents a discussion of the work conducted and details the 
main conclusions.  Recommendations for future work are also given in this 
chapter. 
- 5 - 
2 Literature Review 
2.1 Introduction 
This chapter presents and reviews the important aspects of this research.  
An overview of composite materials is presented which focuses on the 
types of materials under consideration in this study.  The techniques for 
low, intermediate and high strain rate experimental characterisation of 
composite materials are detailed followed by the techniques for 
computational characterisation of composite materials through multi-scale 
finite element modelling. 
Where possible review paper references are given to avoid excessive 
reporting of already well-established, and detailed, techniques.  Should 
more information be desired it is suggested the reader consult the many 
references provided in the chapter. 
2.2 Composite Materials 
Composite materials, also called composites, a solid material that results 
when two or more different substances, each with its own characteristics, 
are combined to create a new substance whose properties are superior to 
those of the original components in a specific application.  [7] 
These two substances are usually a reinforcement material and a matrix 
material.  Reinforcements can come in the form of mono-filaments, multi-
filaments, short fibres, whiskers and particulates.  Matrices can come in the 
form of polymer resins (thermoset and thermoplastic), metals and 
ceramics.  This thesis focuses on multi-filament reinforcements and 
thermoset polymer resin matrices and all further discussion in this 
literature review will be based around this subsection of composite 
materials. 
- 6 - 
2.2.1 Characteristics of Polymer Composite Materials 
Multi-filament reinforcements are made up of thousands of fibres 
(commonly carbon, glass or aramid) i.e. a fibre bundle.  These fibre 
bundles can be arranged into desired fibre bundle architectures.  The 
simplest of fibre bundle architecture is that of a unidirectional (UD) 
composite material where all fibres are aligned parallel to each other.  
Weaving, braiding and knitting can also be used to create more complex 
fibre bundle architectures.  Polymer composite materials are usually made 
up of layers or laminae; where laminae can be stacked to create a 
laminate.  A typical laminate construction would involve orientating 
adjacent unidirectional laminae at 90 to each other creating a 0/90 
laminate, seen in Figure 2-1.  The laminate is balanced about the mid-
plane with one 90 and one 0 layer either side.  The elliptical shaped fibre 
bundles can be seen in the 0 layers. 
Figure 2-1.  Micrograph of a balanced 0/90 cross ply carbon vinyl-ester laminate 
Thermosetting resin matrices commonly come in the liquid form of epoxy, 
un-saturated polyester and vinyl ester and are converted to a solid during 
manufacture by a chemical cross linking process. 
The two constituents, reinforcement and matrix, come together during 
manufacture or in an intermediate stage.  There are many types of 
manufacturing routes of composite materials such as; impregnation 
(intermediate stage), injection moulding, compression moulding, 
pultrusion, filament winding and resin injection.  As fabrication of 
composite materials is not a focus of this thesis please consult Hull and 
Clyne [9] for further information. 
- 7 - 
2.2.2 Elastic Deformation of Polymer Composite 
Materials 
Unidirectional composite materials tend to exhibit a large axial stiffness 
and, in comparison, a low transverse stiffness.  This is due to the high axial 
stiffness of the fibres bearing the load when stressed in the axial direction, 
whereas, in transverse loading a more matrix dominated response is 
observed.  The initial response to loading of a unidirectional composite is in 
general a linear elastic one. 
The initial elastic response of a cross ply laminate is commonly 
approximated as a bi linear curve.  The point where the two linear sections 
intersect corresponds to failure of the plies perpendicular to the loading 
direction. 
2.2.3 Damage and Failure of Polymer Composite 
Materials 
This section discusses the damage and failure mechanisms of unidirectional 
and cross-ply laminates subjected to different loading conditions.  For a 
more in depth review one should consult Hull and Clyne [9]. 
Unidirectional Laminates 
Unidirectional composite lamina can fail by a variety of different 
mechanisms: axial tensile failure, axial compressive failure, transverse 
tensile failure, transverse compressive failure and shear failure. 
Axial tensile failure occurs due to stress in the direction parallel to the 
fibres.  If the matrix has a lower failure strain than the fibres then initial 
damage occurs in the matrix in the form of micro-cracking.  This 
progressive cracking transfers load to the fibres.  Final failure occurs in the 
form of fibre fracture at the failure strain of the fibres as seen in Figure 
2-2.  Fibre fracture can occur before matrix cracking if the failure strain of 
the matrix is greater than that of the fibres. 
- 8 - 
Figure 2-2.  Fibre fracture in glass fibre composite.  Right image is a magnified 
image of the rectangular area in the left image. [10] 
Axial compressive stress can cause fibres to buckle which generates 
compressive and tensile stresses across different sections of the fibre 
enabling fracture or distortion.  As the amount of buckling increases failure 
of the composite occurs.  Buckling instability can also cause a kink band in 
the fibres leading to composite failure as seen in Figure 2-3.  The axial 
compressive stress strain response usually has a lower initial stiffness and 
failure stress than the axial tensile loading stress strain response. 
Figure 2-3. (a) Low magnification of a crack propagating from right to left, (b) 
Initial fibre buckling, (c) Initial cracking, (d) Fully developed kink-band. [10] 
Transverse tensile failure is a complex failure mechanism that is affected 
by multiple factors such as the interfacial strength, fibre distribution and 
void content.  The presence of fibres actually reduces the transverse tensile 
strength and failure strain of the matrix.  If the interfacial strength is low 
then cracks will initiate at the interface between fibre and matrix, however, 
if the interfacial strength is high then the cracks will initiate in the matrix 
close to the interface.  These cracks will then spread through the material 
- 9 - 
via the highly stressed matrix regions as seen in Figure 2-4.  If the fibres 
have a layered structure, hence a low transverse strength, then it is 
possible for failure to occur within the fibres. 
Figure 2-4. Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) micrographs illustrating the 
propagation of a transverse tensile crack in a polyester/glass lamina. [9] 
Transverse compressive failure occurs when the shear stress on planes 
parallel to the fibre axis reaches the shear strength of the matrix. 
There are three different types of shear failure for unidirectional composite 
lamina.  Type one causes sliding of fibres over each other axially, type two 
causes sliding of fibres over each other laterally and type three is through 
thickness shear which can cause fibre fracture. 
Cross-Ply Laminates 
A balanced cross ply (0/90) laminate can also damage through a variety 
of different mechanisms as with unidirectional composite materials.  In in-
plane tensile loading the following sequence of failure occurs; (a) through 
thickness cracking of transverse plies seen in Figure 2-5,  (b) parallel to 
the fibres cracking of axial plies and finally (c) transverse to the fibre 
direction cracking of axial plies (i.e. final failure).  This sequence of events 
is depicted in Figure 2-6. 
- 10 - 
Figure 2-5.  Micrograph of a though thickness crack in plies transverse to the 
loading direction in a 0/90 carbon vinyl-ester cross ply laminate [8] 
Figure 2-6.  Loading of a cross-ply laminate parallel to one of the fibre directions. 
(a) Through thickness cracking of transverse plies, (b) Parallel to the fibres cracking 
of axial plies, (c) Transverse to the fibre direction cracking of axial plies. [9] 
Initially the axial plies carry the majority of the load.  Even though the 
transverse plies do not carry a significant amount of load they are still the 
first to fail due to the much lower strength of unidirectional laminates in 
the transverse direction when compared to the axial direction.  The 
cracking of the transverse plies, therefore, does not transfer a large 
amount of load to the axial plies as they were already bearing the majority.  
This leads to the axial plies remaining undamaged for some time after the 
initial damage in the transverse plies.  As the load increases the axial plies 
develop cracks parallel to the fibres. This occurs due to the axial plies 
- 11 - 
stretching in the loading direction and, therefore, contracting perpendicular 
to the loading direction.  The transverse plies structure resists this 
contraction generating transverse tensile stress which causes the axial 
plies to crack parallel to the fibres.  As the load further increases cracks 
perpendicular to the loading direction will develop across the axial plies 
causing ultimate final failure.  This occurs when the stress reaches the 
tensile strength of the fibres and they fracture.  Transverse cracks can then 
easily develop through the entirety of the laminate as there is little or no 
resistance to the applied stress. 
Mattsson et al [11] conducted tensile tests on NCF cross ply composites 
and investigated the effect of layer stacking sequence.  The paper shows, 
in the form of micrographs, the variety of damage mechanisms that can 
occur, such as, fibre bundle breaks and delamination.  Delamination is a 
critical failure mode for layered composite materials.  It occurs due to 
interlaminar stresses (generated through a mismatch in Poissons ratios 
between various layers) and leads to separation of the plies. 
2.2.4 Strain Rate Dependence of Polymer Composite 
Materials 
Polymers behave in an elastic manner before the point of yield.  This 
reversible elongation before yield is due to bending and stretching of 
covalent bonds in the polymer backbone and recoverable uncoiling of 
polymer chains.  The point of yield occurs when there is irreversible 
slippage of polymer chains.  As these mechanisms are time dependent, low 
stiffness / low strength polymers may resemble high stiffness / high 
strength polymers if the material is tested at a high rate of strain. 
Polymers can be considered as viscoelastic materials where they exhibit 
characteristics of both elastic and viscous materials.  Upon loading elastic 
materials they strain immediately, whereas, viscous materials strain 
linearly with time.  Upon removal of loading elastic materials return to their 
original shape, whereas, viscous materials do not.  In terms of a 
mathematical model an elastic material can be represented by springs, a 
viscous material by dashpots/dampeners and a viscoelastic material by a 
combination of both in series or parallel.  Polymers can be modelled 
explicitly as viscoelastic materials or as elastic materials with the rate 
- 12 - 
dependence accounted for in other ways, such as scaling of material 
properties. 
The polymer of interest in this study is epoxy resin and its strain rate 
dependence has been investigated by a number of researchers [12-17].  
The general trend is that an increase in strain rate increases the stiffness 
and strength of the epoxy resin, as seen in Figure 2-7. 
Figure 2-7.  Epoxy resin true stress strain curves at different strain rates [14] 
The fibres of interest in this study are carbon and S2 glass.  S2 glass fibres 
(typical composition: SiO2 65 wt%, Al2O3 25 wt% and MgO 10 wt%)  have 
a higher strain to failure and modulus than E glass fibres (typical 
composition: SiO2 54 wt%, Al2O3 14 wt%, CaO + MgO 22 wt% and B2O3 10 
wt%) [18].  It is widely accepted that carbon fibres are strain rate 
insensitive in the sense that strain rate has a negligible effect on stiffness, 
ultimate strength and failure strain [19, 20].  Yazici [21] concluded that S2 
glass fibres are rate sensitive, however, it is important to realise this 
conclusion was drawn from tests over a range of low strain rates, less than 
1 /s.  The ultimate strength and stiffness both increased to a maximum 
and then decreased with increasing strain rate. 
The behaviour of the fibre / matrix interfacial layer can exhibit strain rate 
dependence.  This was demonstrated by Tanoglu et al [22] who conducted 
dynamic interfacial loading on E-glass/epoxy-amine samples.  The test 
- 13 - 
used a micro indentation method to debond the fibre from the matrix at 
the interface.  The tests were performed up to displacement rates of 3000 
m/s generating high shear strain rates.  The results demonstrated strain 
rate dependence showing an increase in average apparent shear strength 
with increasing displacement rate. 
Fishpool et al [23] evaluated compatible, semi-compatible, incompatible 
and smart sized S2 glass fibre reinforced epoxy composites.  The 
compatible / semi-compatible sizings were surface treatments used to 
strengthen the bond at the fibre / matrix interface.  The incompatible sizing 
was starch oil system applied to the fibre which inhibited adhesion at the 
fibre / matrix interface.  The smart sizing was developed to generate 
strong interfacial strengths under static load conditions and weak 
interfacial strengths under dynamic loading conditions.  Double notch shear 
and double cantilever bream tests on unidirectional laminates were 
conducted at both quasi-static and dynamic rates of strain.  All fibre sizing 
types exhibited strain rate dependence in the double notch shear and 
double cantilever beam tests.  The amount of strain rate dependence 
varied depending on the type of sizing showing that the fibre / matrix 
interface can have a significant effect on the strain rate dependence of the 
composite. 
Vural and Ravichandran [24] tested unidirectional S2 glass/epoxy 
composites at strain rates up to 10,000 /s in compression. From 0.001 /s 
to 10,000 /s test strain rates the compressive strength increased by 50% 
and the stiffness increased by more than 100%. 
Hosur et al [25] conducted high strain rate (up to 817 /s) compression 
tests on unidirectional and cross ply carbon epoxy laminates.  
Unidirectional laminates were loaded in the longitudinal and transverse 
directions and the cross ply laminates were loaded in the in-plane and 
through thickness directions.  In all samples and loading conditions the 
dynamic stiffness and strength values were larger than the static stiffness 
and strength values, except for the cross ply laminate loaded through the 
thickness where the static strength was greater than the dynamic strength.  
For cross ply in-plane loading, cross ply through thickness loading, UD 0 
loading and UD 90 loading the peak stress changed by +0.7%, -19%, 
+26% and +25% respectively when comparing static loading to high rate 
- 14 - 
loading at 817/s.  For cross ply in-plane, cross ply through thickness, UD 
0 loading and UD 90 loading the stiffness changed by +57%, +11%, 
+87% and +50% respectively when comparing static loading to high rate 
loading at 817/s. 
Okoli et al [26] investigated the effect of strain rate on the failure modes of 
woven glass epoxy composite laminates.  This was conducted by testing 
samples in tension at 1.7x10
 mm/s and 10 mm/s and studying the 
resulting fractured surfaces using a scanning electron microscope (SEM).  
The failure mode changed from brittle fibre failure with fibre pull out at low 
rate loading to brittle failure with a large amount of matrix damage before 
final fracture at high rate loading.  The increased matrix damage at high 
rate loading lead to bunch fibre pull out, this implied that the fibre-matrix 
interfacial bond strength was exceeded before the tensile failure strength 
of the composite. 
The effect of strain rate on composite materials has been reviewed by 
multiple authors [27, 28].  These reviews should be consulted for further 
information on the strain rate dependence on polymer composite materials. 
This section demonstrates the importance of strain rate dependence when 
designing for dynamic loading conditions.  It had been seen by multiple 
authors that material properties such as stiffness and strength can change 
by a staggering amount when the rate of loading is increased.  Not only 
this but it has been shown that there can be a change in the mechanisms 
of failure as the rate of loading is increased, demonstrated by Okoli et al 
[26].   
2.3 Experimental Characterisation of Composite 
Material Properties 
This section gives a brief overview of the experimental techniques required 
to characterise polymer composite materials from quasi-static to high rates 
of strain.  Figure 2-8 demonstrates that a variety of different experimental 
techniques are required not only for different loading condition tests 
(tension, compression and shear) but also for different strain rate tests 
(quasi-static, intermediate and high).  Quasi static strain rates range from 
 to 10
 /s, intermediate strain rates range from 10
 /s to 10
 /s and 
- 15 - 
high strain rates are greater than 10
 /s.  When operating in the high strain 
rate region inertia and wave propagation effects begin to become 
important when analysing the experimental results and at rates higher 
than 10
 /s one has to consider thermodynamic effects [29].  
Figure 2-8.  Experimental techniques for different loading modes and strain rates 
Information on high strain rate experimental techniques can be found in 
the following review papers and books by Zukas et al [29], Hamouda and 
Hashmi [30] and Field et al [31].  
Experimental characterisation of composite materials can be time 
consuming, multifaceted, in terms of using numerous different strain rate 
test procedures and equipment, and often prohibitively expensive [32].  
This has led to the increased interest in multi-scale modelling 
characterisation of composite materials which will be discussed in the 
subsequent section. 
- 16 - 
2.4 Multi-Scale Modelling Characterisation of Composite 
Material Properties 
Multi-scale finite element modelling has the ability to handle the response 
of the composite material at larger scales whilst retaining the detailed 
response at the smaller scales.  An interesting review paper on multi-scale 
modelling and virtual testing has been conducted by Cox and Yang [33] 
and should be consulted for a broader introduction to the topic.  The multi-
scale modelling approach adopted in this thesis is known as a hierarchical 
information transfer process where the information transferred between 
the scales is material properties.  This thesis focuses on modelling 
composite materials at the micro and meso scale.  At the micro scale, 
fibres are embedded in a matrix material to form a yarn or tow i.e. a fibre 
bundle.  At the meso scale, yarns are arranged in a desired architecture, 
e.g. non-crimped, and embedded in a matrix material.  The results of the 
micro scale finite element modelling will provide properties for the meso 
scale yarns.  The results of the meso scale modelling will provide macro 
scale material properties where the macro scale consists of several meso 
scale laminae, comprising a repeated yarn structure, which are stacked to 
form a composite laminate. 
This section now gives a general overview of unit cell modelling and the 
finite element method used in all scales of a multi-scale modelling process.  
The following sections detail how the finite element method has been 
utilised to model the response of polymer composite materials in terms of 
the material response, damage initiation, damage evolution and strain rate 
dependence.  The section is concluded with examples from the literature of 
multi-scale modelling. 
2.4.1 Unit Cell Modelling 
The start of this section gave an explanation of the structure of the micro 
and meso scale.  These structures are often represented by unit cells.  It 
can be assumed that unit cells have an idealised structure that is 
repeatable and periodic.   
The most common assumption at the micro scale is that the fibres are 
aligned parallel to each other and are arranged in a hexagonal or square 
lattice with each fibre having a circular cross section with the same 
- 17 - 
diameter, as described by Hull and Clyne [9].  From one of these 
arrangements many repeatable unit cells can be identified as demonstrated 
in Figure 2-9. 
Figure 2-9.  A hexagonal fibre matrix layout and various periodic elements and unit 
cells.  Shaded areas show that with further symmetry consideration smaller unit 
cells can be identified [34] 
Li [35] determined appropriate periodic boundary conditions for micro scale 
unit cells.  Li warned how the application of incorrect boundary conditions 
leads to effectively different microstructures even though the unit cells may 
look geometrically identical.  It was demonstrated how this can lead to a 
difference in effective properties calculated though micro scale unit cell 
finite element modelling of composite materials. 
At the meso scale the unit cell is identified based on the fabric architecture.  
Small unit cells consisting of a few yarns can be identified for simple fabric 
architectures; such as non crimp fabrics.  Whereas; for complex fabric 
architectures such as 3D woven structures, larger unit cells may be 
necessary. 
- 18 - 
2.4.2 Finite Element Method 
The finite element method (FEM), also known as finite element analysis 
(FEA), is a numerical technique in continuum and structural mechanics.  In 
the FEM the domain is divided up into small regions or elements.  The 
behaviour of each individual element is defined by the elements 
displacement and material law.  Continuity and equilibrium equations are 
utilised to assembly all elements together.  With the application of 
satisfactory boundary conditions a solution can be found for the overall 
system of linear algebraic equations. 
The implicit and explicit methods are two types of approaches used in finite 
element analysis to obtain solutions to the overall system of linear 
algebraic equations.  The implicit method calculates the state at time t+t 
based on information at time t+t, whereas, the explicit method calculates 
the state at time t+t based on information at time t.  The implicit method 
tends to be used in low strain rate quasi-static analyses, whereas, the 
explicit method is more suited to high strain rate dynamic analyses.  An 
explicit solution is more efficient than an implicit solution since no matrix 
inversion is required, however, the explicit solution is not unconditionally 
stable like the implicit solution so it requires a large number of small time 
steps, hence, making it unsuitable for lengthy quasi-static analyses.  The 
efficiency of the explicit solution can be taken advantage of in short 
dynamic transient problems where the small time step size required for 
stability is not an issue. 
The methods described above have for some time now been integrated into 
commercial FEA software packages such as ABAQUS
, ANSYS
COMSOL
, LS-DYNA
, LUCAS
, MADYMO
, NASTRAN
, PAM-CRASH
and RADIOSS
 to name but a few of the more popular packages.  There 
are also numerous free / open source FEA software packages available. 
The finite element modelling of polymer composite materials can broadly 
be divided into four sections; constitutive models, damage initiation 
modelling, damage evolution modelling and strain rate dependent 
modelling.  The state of the art in the literature will be reviewed for each of 
these four sections which correspond to features of the stress strain curve 
in Figure 2-10.  The constitutive model section details the response of the 
material which corresponds to the entirety of the stress strain curve.  The 
- 19 - 
damage initiation modelling section details the initial failure of the material 
which corresponds to point B in the stress strain curve.  The damage 
evolution section details the post elastic response of the material i.e. lines 
BC or BD depending on the type of degradation (sudden or gradual).  The 
strain rate dependent modelling section details how the linear elastic 
region, initial failure point and damage evolution region can change with 
strain rate.  Strain rate can change the gradient of line AB, the location of 
point B and the shape of the line BD.  
Figure 2-10.  Features of a stress strain curve 
2.4.3 Constitutive Models 
Constitutive equations describe relationships between two physical 
quantities.  In stress analysis, constitutive equations link the state of strain 
to the state of stress.  For linear elastic materials the constitutive equation 
is commonly known as Hookes Law seen mathematically in Equation 2-1, 
where  is stress, E is stiffness and  is strain.  The relationship in Equation 
2-1 is a one dimensional model.  For three dimensional models matrix 
notation is used as in Equation 2-2 where  is a 1x6 stress matrix,  is a 
1x6 strain matrix and C is a 6x6 stiffness matrix.  The notation p and q 
denotes the row and column of the matrices respectively. 
Equation 2-2 can be expanded and written out as in Equation 2-3. 
- 20 - 
It appears at first that for a three dimensional analysis there are 36 
independent stiffness constants.  However, this is not the case, as Cpq = 
Cqp due to thermodynamic considerations relating to elastic strain energy 
[36].  This creates symmetry about the leading matrix diagonal leading to 
only 21 independent stiffness constants.  This is the number of constants 
required for a completely anisotropic material.  The number of independent 
stiffness constants is further reduced if the material exhibits a certain type 
of symmetry such as orthotropic (9 constants), transversely isotropic (5 
constants) or isotropic (2 constants).  This concept is clearly demonstrated 
in Figure 2-11.  The matrix constituent in composite materials is often 
defined as an isotropic material; whereas, the fibrous constituent can be 
isotropic (glass fibres) or transversely isotropic (carbon fibres) i.e. carbon 
fibres are much stiffer in the longitudinal direction than the transverse 
direction. A single unidirectional lamina can be considered as an orthotropic 
material but is often treated as transversely isotropic. 
Figure 2-11.  Examples of stiffness matrices of materials exhibiting different types 
of symmetry,  reproduced from [36] 
- 21 - 
For further information on the constitutive models used to model the linear 
elastic response, and indeed the post elastic response, please consult the 
following literature documents [9, 36, 37]. 
2.4.4 Damage Initiation Modelling 
The initiation of damage in finite element modelling is controlled by failure 
criteria.  Failure criteria are mathematical equations that define the state of 
stress and strain at the point of damage initiation.  Failure criteria can be 
divided into two groups; mode independent and mode dependent [37].  
Mode independent failure criteria predict the occurrence of damage but do 
not identify the failure mode / type of damage, whereas, mode dependent 
failure criteria can do both as they usually consist of several equations with 
each one representing a particular type of failure mode.  Failure criteria can 
be further categorised as non-interactive and interactive [37].  In non-
interactive failure criteria the failure prediction in one loading mode is not 
affected by the failure in another loading mode, whereas, in interactive 
failure criteria the opposite is true due to the multiple components present 
in the mathematical equations.  The most commonly used failure criteria 
are listed in Figure 2-12.  For additional information on any of the failure 
criteria mentioned please consult the references given in the detailed 
review paper by Garnich and Akula [37]. 
Mode Independent Mode Dependent 
Maximum Stress Criterion Hashin-Rotem Criterion 
Maximum Strain Criterion Hashin Criterion 
Distortional Energy Criterion Lee Criterion 
Hill Criterion Christensen Criterion 
Tsai-Hill Criterion Mayes and Hansen Criterion 
Hoffman Criterion  
Chamis Criterion  
Tsai-Wu Criterion  
Sandhu Criterion  
Figure 2-12.  Mode independent and mode dependent failure criteria 
Zhao et al [38] analysed the progressive failure of NCF composite 
laminates using FEA.  A representative volume element (RVE) of a 0/90 
balanced cross-ply laminate was loaded in in-plane tension.  Combinations 
of different failure criteria were used for the tows and resin.  The maximum 
- 22 - 
stress, Hoffman and Tsai-Wu failure criterion were considered for the tows, 
whereas, the maximum stress, von Mises and Drucker-Prager failure 
criterion were considered for the polymer resin.  Full details of these failure 
criteria are given in the paper.  The use of all these different failure criteria 
generated nine different tow/resin failure criteria combinations.  The 
different combinations generated different load-strain curves and damage 
contours.  The recommendations arising from the paper, following 
consideration of the load-strain curves and damage evolution patterns, 
were to use the maximum stress criterion for the tows and the maximum 
stress criterion or the Drucker Prager criterion for the polymer resin. 
A comprehensive review of failure criteria for composite materials was 
performed by Orifici et al [39].  The authors have included the 
mathematical equations for the most common failure criteria for different 
constituents and loading modes. 
2.4.5 Damage Evolution Modelling 
Damage evolution occurs after damage initiation.  The evolution of damage 
can be broadly classified into two categories; sudden degradation and 
gradual degradation.  In sudden degradation, material properties are 
reduced instantaneously to a fraction of the original value.  In gradual 
degradation, materials properties are functions of developing field 
variables.  In Figure 2-10 line BC represents sudden degradation and line 
BD represents gradual degradation.  For path BC the stiffness at point B 
has been instantaneously reduced to practically zero hence the sharp 
vertical drop off in stress.  For path BD the stiffness has been gradually 
reduced starting at point B, the stiffness is a function of the strain 
developing field variable.  Garnich and Akula [37] have extensively detailed 
the different sudden and gradual degradation models.  Knight [40] also 
discusses the damage evolution strategies that provide material 
degradation after damage initiation.  The author classified the different 
models into two broad categories, similar to Garnich and Akula [37], 
heuristic models based on ply discounting material degradation (sudden) 
and models based on continuum damage mechanics using internal state 
variables (gradual). 
- 23 - 
2.4.6 Strain Rate Dependent Modelling 
As explained in 2.2.4, Strain Rate Dependence of Polymer Composite 
Materials, the material properties, such as stiffness and strength, of 
polymer composite materials can be strain rate dependent.  The inclusion 
of this feature in modelling work has only recently been considered by 
researchers; hence, there is limited literature in the field and limited 
support for strain rate effects in commercially available finite element 
packages. 
In the finite element package LS-DYNA there are eleven available 
composite materials models (MAT 22, 52, 55, 58, 59, 114, 116, 117, 118, 
161 and 162).  Schweizerhof et al [41] tested and critically reviewed some 
of these material models and the paper should be consulted for further 
information on the merits and limits of composite material models in LS-
DYNA.  Figure 2-13 gives an overview of these material models and 
indicates if the model contains failure criteria, the control of damage after 
failure and strain rate effects.  Out of the eleven available composite 
models only three incorporate strain rate effects and, of these three, only 
two incorporate both damage effects and strain rate effects (MAT 161 and 
MAT 162).  MAT 161 and 162 are progressive failure analysis models for 
composite materials which have incorporated Hashin failure criteria.  The 
models can be used to simulate fibre failure, matrix damage and 
delamination.  A damage mechanics approach, based on theory by 
Matzenmiller [42], is used which allows control of the softening behaviour 
after damage initiation.  Strain rate dependence is available for stiffness 
and strength parameters.  The issue with these models is that they are 
only available for solid elements, a version for shell elements has not yet 
been released, and an additional license from Materials Sciences 
Corporation is required as they developed and continue to support the 
models.  Therefore, if one wants to simulate composite failure, damage and 
strain rate effects and your finite element software of choice is LS-DYNA 
and you are not prepared to spend a large amount of money for a 
MAT161/162 license or spend a large amount of time developing your own 
material model then you would have to compromise with simpler model 
such as MAT114 and miss out damage effects or MAT 54/55/58 and miss 
out strain rate effects. 
- 24 - 
 FAIL DAM SRATE 
MAT 22 X   
MAT 54 X X  
MAT 55 X X  
MAT 58 X X  
MAT 59 X   
MAT 114 X  X 
MAT 116    
MAT 117    
MAT 118    
MAT 161 X X X 
MAT 162 X X X 
Figure 2-13.  Summary of LS-DYNA composite material models where FAIL = failure 
criteria, DAM = damage effects and SRATE = strain rate effects 
Abaqus has a rate dependent yield function that can be used when the 
yield strength depends on the rate of stain and when the anticipated strain 
rates are significant.  This function can be used for the following material 
models: the isotropic hardening metal plasticity models (Mises and 
Johnson-Cook), the isotropic component of the nonlinear 
isotropic/kinematic plasticity models, the Drucker-Prager plasticity model 
and the crushable foam plasticity model.  The rate dependent yield function 
is defined by providing tabular data, by defining overstress power law 
parameters or by providing yield stress ratios.  The Abaqus documentation 
states that; Rate-dependent yield in dynamic analysis should be specified 
such that the yield stress increases with increasing strain rate [43].  This 
is an obvious limitation to the built in rate dependent yield function as one 
would not be able to specify a decrease in yield stress with increasing 
strain rate. 
Yen [44] presented a computational constitutive model to be utilised in the 
progressive failure of composites laminates under ballistic impacts.  The 
model incorporated progressive failure as well as the strain rate 
dependence of the materials.  The model was implemented in LS-DYNA as 
a regular material subroutine.  The strain rate dependence of strength was 
controlled by multiplying the quasi-static values by a scale factor.  This 
scale factor is unity plus strain rate constant multiplied by the natural log 
of the strain rate.  Yen [44] went on to simulate the ballistic impact of S2-
- 25 - 
Glass/Epoxy composite panels.  The results indicated a good correlation 
between experimental and numerical ballistic fibre damage.  It was 
concluded that the strain rate effect needs further investigation by 
experimentally characterising the strain rate dependence of various 
composite materials, for modelling input properties as well as modelling 
validation. 
Zheng and Binienda [45] presented a rate-dependent shell element 
composite material model.  The model was implemented in LS-DYNA as a 
user defined material.  Rate dependence was incorporated in the elastic 
modulus of the matrix constituent through a logarithmic scaling law 
developed by Yen [44].  IM7/977-2 polymer composite materials were 
tested in longitudinal tension for three laminate arrangements (10, 45 
and 90).  The material was tested experimentally, by Goldberg et al [46], 
and computationally from low (1 /s) to high (400 /s) rates of strain.  The 
numerical results in the form of a stress strain curves compared well with 
the experimental stress strain curves at the low strain rates.  The 
experimental curves at the high strain rates often showed a larger initial 
stiffness than the numerical results.  The researchers attributed this large 
initial stiffness to an artefact of the specimen geometry and the way the 
stress waves propagated through the specimen in the experimental testing.  
At the high strain rates some experimental curves flatten out and the 
numerical curves remain straight, Zheng and Binienda [45] explain that 
this could be due to early failure in the experimental specimens. 
Daniel et al [47] conducted quasi-static, intermediate and high strain rate 
experimental testing on unidirectional carbon/epoxy composites.  Off-axis 
specimens were tested to produce stress states combining transverse 
normal and in-plane shear stresses.  The results showed that stiffness and 
strengths varied linearly with the logarithm of strain rate.  The strength 
values obtained in experimental testing were then predicted with a range 
of classical failure criteria (maximum stress, Tsai-Hill, Tsai-Wu), partially 
interactive failure criteria (Hashin-Rotem and Sun) and the authors NU 
theory.  The NU theory was primarily applicable to interfiber / interlaminar 
failure for transverse normal and in-plane shear stress states.  The NU 
theory was expressed as three sub-criteria (compressive, shear and tensile 
dominated failure) presented in one common failure envelope with strain 
rate effects based on logarithmic scaling laws.  With NU theory failure 
- 26 - 
envelopes compared well to experimental results at all strain rates and 
gave better predictions than all the other failure criteria.  Figure 2-14 
shows the experimental results and the NU theory predicted failure 
envelopes discussed above and demonstrates the importance of including 
strain rate effects in the failure prediction of composite materials, 
especially when simulating in the high strain rate regime. 
Figure 2-14.  Comparison of experimental results and failure envelopes predicted by 
the NU theory for AS4/3501-6 carbon/epoxy composite at three strain rates by 
Daniel et al [47] 
Meyer and Mayer [48] presented a strain rate dependent material and 
failure model for the static and dynamic material behaviour of fibre 
reinforced composites.  A viscoelastic constitutive model and an improved 
version of the Failure Mode Concept of Cuntze [49] were implemented as a 
user defined material model in LS-DYNA.  The improvement in Cuntze 
Failure Mode Concept was to incorporate strain rate dependent material 
strength behaviour.  0/90 glass fibre reinforced composites were tested 
experimentally and numerically under different types of loading from 10
to 10
 /s.  It was concluded that the new model developed by Meyer and 
Mayer allowed good prediction of strain rate dependent material behaviour 
and accurate prediction of the strain rate dependent onset of failure. 
Heimbs et al [50] used LS-DYNA in conjunction with MAT 54 to simulate 
the crash behaviour of the nose cone of an F1 racing car front impact 
- 27 - 
structure.  The sandwich structure was modelled using the layered shell 
element approach.  A certain number of shell elements were defined 
through the thickness to represent the core and skin laminate layers.  The 
core and skin were modelled as orthotropic linear elastic materials using 
MAT 54 which is based on the Chang/Chang failure criteria.  In the skin the 
erosion of individual layers and total absorbed energy was controlled with 
MAT 54 failure strain parameters.  The crash front algorithm of MAT 54 was 
also used in the skin to reduce the strength of elements close to failed 
elements to allow continuous crushing.  In the core elastic-perfect plastic 
stress strain behaviour was modelled.  The reason for detailing this 
literature document is that the researchers have clearly gone into a lot of 
detail in modelling the nose cone impact structure and yet have neglected 
to consider strain rate effects in an application that one would consider it to 
be of paramount importance.   
2.4.7 Multi-Scale Modelling 
This section gives examples from the literature of modelling at the micro, 
meso and macro scale; hence, details the multi-scale modelling approach.   
A multi-scale finite element modelling approach with the aims of 
complementing and replacing experimental tests for material 
characterisation was described by Ernst et al [51].  Glass/epoxy composite 
materials were modelled at the micro (fibre and matrix), meso (tow 
architecture) and macro scale (homogeneous layer or textile layer) as seen 
in Figure 2-15.   
- 28 - 
Figure 2-15.  Multi-scale modelling approach conducted by Ernst et al [51] 
The micro scale unit cell, square packing, was tested in tension and 
compression in the transverse direction and also in in-plane and transverse 
shear.  Micro scale loading in the fibre direction was not considered in this 
study as it is stated in the paper that several rules of mixture approaches 
give good estimates for properties in this direction.  The meso scale unit 
cell, NCF, was tested with normal loads in three directions and in three 
shear loadings.  The macro scale validation test was a three point bend test 
of a thick NCF specimen.  Simplified periodic boundary conditions were 
applied to both micro and meso scale unit cells as described by Sun and 
Vaidya [52].  The epoxy resin (micro and meso) was treated as an isotropic 
material, the fibres (micro) were modelled as linear elastic materials and 
the fibre bundles (meso) were modelled as transversely isotropic materials.  
The response of the epoxy resin was controlled with an elastic-plastic 
material model that took into account the pressure dependency of the 
material.  A quadratic failure surface was used for the epoxy resin that was 
proposed by Fiedler et al [53] along with consideration of the material 
strength under pure shear.  When the failure criterion was reached the 
stiffness of the epoxy resin was degraded by a damage evolution law 
- 29 - 
according to Lemaitre and Chaboche [54].  This involved using a scalar 
damage variable varying from zero to one which was subtracted from unity 
and multiplied by the effective stress.  After damage was initiated the 
fracture energy proposal of Hillerborg et al [55]was used to reduce mesh-
dependency by creating a stress-relative displacement response.  The fibre 
bundles strength was predicted by the invariant-based quadratic criterion 
and the softening formulation presented by Vogler et al [56].  At the macro 
scale an orthotropic linear elastic material model up to failure was applied 
and failure was predicted with the criterion of Juhasz et al [57] which is 
based on the fracture hypothesis of Mohr.  Damage evolution was 
controlled by Pucks formulation [58] where stiffness of damaged plies 
were degraded gradually with increasing load until ultimate failure of the 
laminate.  The macro scale finite element results compared well with 
experimental results, especially in terms of the progressive failure.  The 
final failure, however, was under predicted which was attributed to 
insufficient isotropic damage formulation.  This paper clearly demonstrates 
the complexity of multi-scale modelling.  With the addition of strain rate 
dependence, which this paper does not consider, the complexity is further 
increased. 
Wang et al [59] presented micro scale yarn and meso scale woven 
composite finite element modelling to predict stiffness values of a 3D 
woven orthogonal interlock composite.  A unit cell approach was taken 
where at both scales periodic boundary conditions were applied.  At the 
micro scale the yarns were considered as unidirectional composites with 
fibres arranged in idealised hexagonal packing.  The meso scale unit cell 
was constructed with weft and warp yarns in the desired architecture to 
form a 3D woven composite.  The micro scale modelling predicted material 
constants for the yarns which were then used in the meso scale modelling 
to predict the material parameters of 3D woven composites.  The FEA took 
place in NASTRAN and the stiffness predictions were in good agreement 
with available test data.  The limitation of this paper is that it only 
considers the elastic response, it is however mentioned in future work that 
damage analysis is work that is currently being conducted. 
Van Den Broucke et al [60] modelled the elastic and damage behaviour of 
NCF and UD braided composites.  The Ladevze continuum damage 
mechanics model for UD composites was utilised to predict damage at the 
- 30 - 
micro scale.  The model distinguished between different loading modes and 
translated them into a deterioration scheme for the mechanical properties.  
These mechanical properties were used in the meso scale model which was 
generated using the WiseTex suite [61].  The elements in the yarns, 
generated using FETex (the finite element analysis section of the WiseTex 
suite), were assigned properties based on their location in the structure as 
fibre orientation and volume fraction can vary within the yarn.  The meso 
scale RVE was tested in six loading conditions with periodic boundary 
conditions to obtain homogenised material properties.  The predicted 
elastic and damage properties for all selected validation materials showed 
good agreement with experimental values apart from in bi-axial samples 
which was attributed to geometrical non-linearities not considered in the 
simulations.  In-plane properties of quadri-axial samples could not be 
calculated due to simulation convergence problems.  This paper further 
demonstrates the complexity involved in multi-scale modelling, to such an 
extent that special software packages, such as the WiseTex suite, are often 
used to ease geometry generation at each of the scales of analysis. 
Okereke et al [62] presented a virtual testing procedure for the numerical 
homogenisation of elastic and damage behaviour of bi-directional 
composites.  Analysis took place at the micro scale (individual fibres and 
matrix), meso scale I (matrix pockets and yarns of different orientation), 
meso scale II (unidirectional reinforced plies of single orientation) and 
macro scale (global structure of composite).  Initial results gave reliable 
predictions of the elastic properties, damage initiation and damage 
evolution at the macro scale.  This paper further demonstrates that multi-
scale modelling can be a reliable route for establishing composite 
properties, in both the elastic and damage regions. 
Zhang et al [63] conduced hierarchical multi-scale modelling of fibre 
reinforced composites.  Information was transferred between the micro, 
meso and macro scale.  At the micro scale a 3D column model was used to 
calculate the residual stresses, due to the difference in thermal expansion 
during manufacture, which were fed into the meso scale model as 
interfacial frictional stresses.  At the meso scale five fibres were modelled 
with one centrally fractured fibre for stress transfer distribution analysis 
with a shear-lag model.  Meso scale analysis also took into account the 
plasticity of the matrix.  Macro scale modelling consisted of Monte Carlo 
- 31 - 
simulations on a regular square bundle array of fibres.  The residual stress 
and stress transfer information was integrated into the macro scale 
progressive damage model through average stress concentration factors.  
The macro scale modelling was able to predict the stress strain behaviour 
of the composite material which compared well to experimental testing.  
This paper demonstrates that multi-scale modelling can be tailored to a 
particular area of interest i.e. in this paper the micro scale focused on 
residual stresses due to differences in thermal expansion. 
Foreman et al [64] conducted multi-scale modelling at the molecular scale, 
using group interaction modelling (GIM), and at the micro scale, using FEA.  
GIM is used to predict the strain rate dependent stress-strain behaviour 
through yield of an amine cured epoxy resin matrix.  This data is then used 
in FEA modelling of a unidirectional carbon/epoxy composites to determine 
strain concentration factors of fibres adjacent to a fibre break.  Although 
this paper only bridges two scales of analysis, one of them, which is 
outside of the scope of this thesis, it is of interest due to the strain rate 
dependence included which appears in very few literature papers. 
Grujicic et al [65] formulated and implemented, as a material subroutine 
suitable for commercial finite element packages, a multi-scale unit cell 
continuum damage material model for 0/90 cross-ply unidirectional 
composites.  The authors explained how the idea behind the modelling was 
to simulate the mechanical response of the meso scale unit cell and 
homogenise this into an equivalent response of a continuum material for 
use in macro scale modelling.  The type of multi-scale modelling in this 
paper differs from those previously described as the process is a coupled 
meso scale / continuum level model.  The researchers detailed how the 
coupling between the continuum material formulation and the unit-cell 
geometry and mechanical response was done in the following way: 
(a) the deformation state of a continuum material point (as quantified by 
the corresponding deformation gradient) is used to update the unit-cell 
geometry; (b) the updated unit-cell geometry and the state of the 
continuum material at the end of the previous time increment are used to 
update the extent of structural damage in the unit cell; and (c) the updated 
material state obtained in point (b) is then used to compute the stress 
state at the end of the current time increment. 
- 32 - 
This type of multi-scale modelling can be classed as a seamless integration 
of the scales rather than hierarchical multi-scale modelling.  The Ultra High 
Molecular Weight Poly-Ethylene (UHMWPE) meso scale yarns were 
modelled as orthotropic linear elastic materials up to the point of failure, 
under axial tension or transverse shear.  The polymer matrix was modelled 
as a linear isotropic material.  The paper has paid a lot of attention to 
interfacial bonding failure between the yarns and the matrix.  An extensive 
amount of time was taken to perform atomic simulations to gain 
information of interfacial bonding / de-bonding behaviour; this information 
was then subsequently used in the meso scale simulations.  It was pointed 
out in the paper that reviewers of the work indicated that the response of 
composite materials is strain rate dependent.  The authors response to this 
was that the material model was intended to be used only in the high rate 
loading regime where the constituent materials tend to behave as linear 
elastic materials with weak rate dependency.  This is a very broad 
statement and only holds for certain types of composite materials.  For 
example, looking at Figure 2-7, the rate dependency of epoxy resin is 
prevalent across the full range of strain rates.  Macro scale finite element 
validation testing was conducted through ballistic impacts on composite 
laminates.  The results obtained were comparable with experimental 
testing reported in [66]. 
Lua et al [67] produced a hybrid damage model by combining discrete and 
continuum damage models.  The continuum damage model degraded the 
stiffness of the woven E-glass / vinyl-ester composite based on stress 
strain behaviour and failure criteria.  The discrete damage model captured 
delamination with a cohesive interface model.  This hybrid model was 
implemented in LS-DYNA via a user defined material model and was used 
to perform multi-scale modelling at the constituent, ply and laminated 
composite scale.  The scales were seamlessly integrated together through 
multilevel homogenisation and decomposition.  The response at the meso 
scale (e.g. plain weave unit cell) was decomposed to give the response at 
the micro scale (e.g. sub cell of plain weave unit cell).  This micro scale 
response was then used in a micromechanics model to enable progressive 
damage analysis using modified Hashin failure criteria and damage 
evolution theory based on work by Matzenmiller [42].  The homogenised 
damaged material properties at the meso scale were then based on the 
- 33 - 
damaged material properties at the micro scale.  Macro scale laminate 
properties were calculated from individual ply properties and it was at this 
scale that the cohesive interface model for delamination and propagation 
was utilised.  The authors simulated the dynamic shock loading of a circular 
laminated composite plate, the low velocity impact of the bottom base 
plate of a composite hat stiffener and the drop weight impact of a 
composite sandwich beam.  This multi-scale modelling paper, along with 
others presented in this section, does not consider strain rate dependence.  
It is, therefore, surprising that numerical results correlate well with 
experimental data when the three events simulated (dynamic shock, low 
velocity impact and drop weight impact) are not in the quasi-static strain 
rate range.  It has also been shown by other researchers that the effect of 
strain rate on the stress strain response of E-glass / vinyl ester composites, 
used in this work by Lua et al [67], can be significant [68]. 
Fujita et al [69] studied the transverse strength of unidirectional 
composites by performing 2D FE modelling of randomly dispersed fibres in 
a resin matrix, where interfacial elements connected fibres and resin.  
Damage was defined using Hoffmans criterion and Mises criterion for 
interfacial and resin regions respectively.  Transverse tension simulations 
based on damage mechanics were conducted for 20 random fibre 
dispersions at 40% and 60% volume fraction.  The results showed that an 
increase in volume fraction lead to a lower transverse tensile strength.  
This was due to the small distances between damaged interfaces at high 
volume fractions; hence, a lower amount of stress was required to bridge 
these gaps.  A comparison was made between the transverse tensile stress 
strain response of an idealised hexagonally packed unit cell and a random 
model.  In the idealised unit cell the interfacial elements all damaged at the 
same time which corresponded to a large drop in stress in the stress strain 
curve followed by a gradual increase in stress as the resin damaged.  In 
the random model the stress grew gradually after initial interfacial damage 
of some fibre/resin interfaces.  The future work stated in the paper 
explained how the authors would like to utilise the results from their work 
in a multi-scale analysis; continuing to the meso and macro scale.  This 
would allow an estimation of strength at the larger scales using fibre 
bundle properties based on randomly dispersed fibre distributions at the 
micro scale.  This paper has been included to show the exciting areas that 
multi-scale modelling is branching into and how the multi-scale approach 
- 34 - 
can be used to establish many different properties such as statistical 
strength distributions of composite laminates based on randomly dispersed 
fibres at the micro scale. 
2.5 Conclusions 
This chapter presented an overview of composite materials which focused 
on the types of materials under consideration in this study.  The techniques 
for low, intermediate and high strain rate experimental characterisation of 
composite materials were detailed followed by the techniques for 
computational characterisation of composite materials through multi-scale 
finite element modelling. 
It has been shown that the interest in simulating composite materials 
under high strain rate loading is intensifying due to the requirement of 
lightweight military vehicle armour, which is subjected to blast and ballistic 
events.  Simulations may never fully replace experimental testing but it 
has been demonstrated that it has the opportunity to reduce the amount of 
experimental testing required, resulting in significant time and cost 
savings. 
The review of composite materials showed that they consist of multiple 
constituents with different structures at different scales.  This has led many 
researchers considering a multi-scale analysis to capture the detail of the 
materials response at the micro, meso and macro scale.  A purely elastic 
analysis at these multiple scales has been shown to be extremely involved 
and complex by multiple researchers.  The addition of damage initiation 
has been considered by some but few have taken on the task of simulating 
how the damage evolves after initial failure.  There is also a very apparent 
gap in the literature that few people consider the strain rate dependence of 
composite materials, especially in a multi-scale analysis, even in 
applications where one would consider it of paramount importance.  These 
observations of the literature are backed up in concluding remarks in work 
by Aminjikarai and Tabiei [70]: 
Though numerous micro-mechanical models have been developed in the 
past for modelling the behavior of unidirectional polymer matrix 
composites, there are very few that consider their progressive post-failure 
and even fewer that account for their strain-rate dependent behaviour. 
- 35 - 
It is clear that there is a need for a multi-scale modelling methodology 
which can predict macro scale component behaviour with knowledge of 
micro and meso constituent behaviour and material structure.  The 
methodology should allow prediction of not only elastic behaviour but also 
damage behaviour, initiation and evolution, and strain rate dependent 
behaviour.  
- 36 - 
3 Modelling Methodology 
3.1 Introduction 
The multi-scale modelling approach adopted in this thesis is depicted in 
Figure 3-1 where FEA at the micro scale provides input properties for the 
meso scale and FEA at the meso scale provides input properties for the 
macro scale. 
Figure 3-1.  Multi-scale modelling approach 
3.2 Unit Cell Definitions and Generation 
Python scripting has been utilised to automate the geometry generation of 
the micro and meso scale unit cells shown in Figure 3-2.  The micro scale 
geometry consists of fibres surrounded by an interface all embedded in a 
matrix material.  The meso scale geometry consists of yarns arranged in a 
balanced, about the mid-plane, 0/90 NCF fabric architecture all 
embedded in a matrix material. 
- 37 - 
Figure 3-2.  Micro and meso scale unit cell geometries.  Micro parameters: 2R  
closest centre to centre spacing of fibres, h  separation of the fibres.  Meso 
parameters: YH  yarn height, YW  yarn width, YS  yarn spacing, TTS  through 
thickness spacing. 
3.2.1 Micro Scale Unit Cell 
Fibre Packing 
The micro scale unit cell geometry, seen in Figure 3-2, is generated based 
on the fibre radius (r) and fibre volume fraction (f).  Assumptions are made 
that all fibres are aligned parallel to one another and that they are 
arranged in an idealised hexagonal packing arrangement.  The closest 
centre to centre spacing of the fibres (2R) is then calculated from Equation 
3-1 and the separation of the fibres (h) from Equation 3-2.  These 
equations are taken from Hull and Clyne [9]. 
       
The idealised hexagonal packing was chosen over square packing due to 
the higher maximum volume fraction that can be obtained.  Hexagonal 
packing has a theoretical maximum of 90.7%, whereas, for square packing 
it is 78.5%.  The hexagonal packing also appeared to better represent 
reality from the micrographs taken on the materials under consideration in 
this project.  High volume fraction randomly packed representative unit 
- 38 - 
cells (RUC) were considered to be outside the scope of this project due to 
the large amount of simulations already involved in testing at multiple 
scales and at multiple strain rates.  The use of randomly packed unit cells 
would involve even more testing due to the statistical nature of RUC 
analysis. 
The size of the hexagonal unit cell could be reduced by using symmetry 
e.g. vertical and horizontal symmetry for a quarter size unit cell.  This 
would give the advantage of reduced simulation times due to a reduced 
number of elements.  However, the unit cell has been kept as shown in 
Figure 3-2 to enable easier application of periodic boundary conditions 
based only on translational symmetry.  Another way to reduce simulation 
time by reducing the number of elements would be to reduce the thickness 
of the unit cell in the longitudinal direction.  The thickness was arbitrarily 
set as the same as the radius of the fibre.  Depending on the type of 
loading it could even be possible to perform some 2D analyses; this would 
significantly reduce the simulation time.  However, this would require more 
time spent on producing material models that work in both 2D and 3D. 
Interfacial Layer 
There is an interfacial layer around all fibres in the micro unit cell.  Half of 
the interfacial volume takes up matrix volume and the other half of the 
interfacial volume takes up fibre volume.  This obviously reduces the 
maximum possible fibre volume fraction; however, the interfacial layer is 
thin at one tenth of the fibre radius.  Mishnaevsky and Brndsted [71] also 
considered interface de-bonding as a 3D process rather than a 2D process 
involving the opening of two contacting plane surfaces.  The thought 
behind this was that fibres can be rough and the interface regions in many 
composites contain interphases.  Both of these factors influence the 
interface de-bonding process and they do not occur in a 2D space, rather in 
a 3D thin layer somewhere between the fibre and matrix.  This point of 
view was also taken by Tursun et al [72] who conducted damage modelling 
on particle reinforced composites. 
Fibre Diameter Measurements 
Cross sectional micrographs through the thickness of laminates were taken 
so multiple fibres within a yarn could be viewed and analysed.  Three 
micrographs were taken and 25 fibre diameters were measured in each 
- 39 - 
micrograph using a piece of image processing and analysis software, coded 
in Java, known as ImageJ [73].  The average of the 75 fibre diameters was 
taken to be the fibre diameter in the modelling work.  This was performed 
for both S2 glass and carbon fibres.  
Fibre Volume Fraction Measurements 
Micro scale volume fractions were obtained from multiple high 
magnification cross sectional micrographs of fibre bundles and an 
automated image analysis procedure developed at The University of 
Nottingham [74].  The method involved identifying firstly, a point within 
the fibres cross sectional area as in Figure 3-3 (a), and, secondly, a 
window that was sufficiently large enough to capture the whole filament 
centred on this location.  In this window, local colour gradients were 
calculated as in Figure 3-3 (b).  As the light varied across the micrograph 
an absolute threshold value could not be used to identify pixels that were 
positioned on the fibre boundary.  A relative threshold value was used 
which identified a boundary pixel in-between a fibre and matrix pixel.  It 
was possible that the window used to capture the whole fibre could contain 
parts of other fibres; therefore, boundary pixels on other fibres would be 
identified.  To identify the boundary pixels for only the current fibre of 
interest the centre point of the fibre was used and those boundary pixels at 
a defined radius away were identified.  The fibre boundary was constructed 
by fitting an ellipse that passed through these boundary pixels.  Radius and 
position were determined for each individual fibre in the yarn, Figure 3-3 
(c).  All this information was used to create the black and white image 
shown in Figure 3-3 (d).  This process was repeated for all the high 
magnification cross sectional micrographs taken. 
- 40 - 
Figure 3-3.  Fibre volume fraction analysis for a section of a carbon/epoxy yarn. 
(a)Identification of fibre location, (b) Colour map for overlap check, (c) Fibre centre 
and boundary identification and (d) Black and white image showing volume fraction 
on a pixel line by pixel line basis horizontally and vertically.  Vf = Volume Fraction. 
The black and white images, an example is Figure 3-3 (d), are then all 
assembled together to create one large image of the entire yarn 
demonstrated in Figure 3-4.  The location of the example black and white 
image, Figure 3-3 (d), in the yarn cross section is indicated in Figure 3-4 in 
the bottom right of the figure.  The fibre volume fraction within the yarn 
boundary is then calculated by segmenting the assembled image into a 
finite number of vertical slices.  The yarn boundary is determined in such a 
way that an envelope is determined around the detected fibre cross 
sections, Figure 3-4.  The number of pixels in the vertical slices between 
the top and bottom of the yarn boundary belonging to a fibre are counted.  
Any pixels not counted are assumed to be matrix or void regions.  The 
volume fraction within the yarn boundary can then be calculated as the 
number of fibre pixels divided by the number of non-fibre pixels.  
Performing this on a slice by slice basis also allows extra information on 
how the volume fraction varies across the yarn. 
- 41 - 
Figure 3-4.  Carbon/epoxy yarn cross section showing fibres in green, the top 
boundary in blue and the bottom boundary in red. 
3.2.2 Meso Scale Unit Cell 
The meso scale unit cell consists of four unidirectional yarns / fibre bundles 
embedded in a matrix material.  The yarns are arranged in a balanced, 
about the mid-plane, 0/90 NCF fabric architecture as seen in Figure 3-2. 
The reason for modelling a balanced about the mid-plane NCF rather than 
an unbalanced NCF is due to the shear deformation that occurs in an 
unbalanced layup when subjected to a uniaxial displacement as seen in 
Figure 3-5. 
- 42 - 
Figure 3-5.  Unbalanced NCF (TOP) and balanced NCF (BOTTOM) subjected to in-
plane tension in the x direction.  Contours show displacement in the x direction 
where red indicates a large positive displacement and blue indicates a large 
negative displacement 
The yarn width and yarn height are taken as an average of multiple 
measurements on micrographs of S2 glass and carbon laminates.  In the 
analysis 24 carbon yarns and 13 S2 glass yarns were measured.  The yarn 
spacing and through thickness spacing in the model are adjusted by a 
proportional amount to give the desired meso scale volume fraction. 
The two yarns not aligned along the z direction have local material axes 
assigned.  The material axes are set so the z direction is parallel to the 
yarn direction.  This is important for the application of material properties, 
as longitudinal and transverse yarn properties can be different, and the 
correct functioning of the yarn user defined material model detailed in 
3.4.4. 
3.3 Boundary Conditions 
Periodic boundary conditions have been applied to both micro and meso 
scale unit cells.  These boundary conditions imply that each unit cell has 
the same deformation mode and there is no separation or overlap between 
adjacent unit cells.  Figure 3-6 shows a single unit cell that has periodic 
boundary conditions and has been subjected to shear loading.  If the unit 
cell is repeated horizontally and vertically it is clearly seen there is no 
separation or overlap between adjacent unit cells.  If one now considers 
damage within a unit cell with periodic boundary conditions the implication 
- 43 - 
is that the damage is also periodic i.e. every unit cell has the same amount 
of damage, location of damage etc.  In reality damage will most likely 
occur at various locations due to stress concentrations and the damage 
progression will be different for different locations of initial damage. 
Figure 3-6.  (a) Single unit cell with periodic boundary conditions in transverse 
shear loading and (b) six copies of the single unit cell in (a).  Contours show von 
Mises stress where red is high stress and blue is low stress.  
Boundary conditions have been derived and applied to unit cells based on 
translational symmetry following the method described in a paper by Li and 
Wongsto [75].  The derivation of these boundary conditions will now be 
detailed with reference to Figure 3-7.  Although the unit cells in Figure 3-7 
are micro scale unit cells the derivation and application of the boundary 
conditions applies in the same way to the meso scale unit cell. 
Figure 3-7.  Periodic unit cells where point P/ O is the image point P/O in another 
unit cell. 
- 44 - 
The displacement of point P minus the displacement of point O in any one 
direction is equal to the displacement of P minus the displacement of O; 
Equation 3-3.   The equations can be rearranged to show that the 
displacement of point P minus the displacement of point P is equal to the 
displacement of point O minus the displacement of point O; Equation 3-4. 
The terms u, v, w are displacements in the x, y and z direction 
respectively. 
uuuu 
vvvv 
wwww 
uuuu 
vvvv 
wwww 
Equation 3-5 shows the relationship between the macroscopic strains x, 
y,  z, yz, xz, xy and the relative displacements between a point P in 
the unit cell and a point P in another cell where x, y and z are coordinates 
of P and x, y and z are coordinates of P.  One can now consider point P 
and P to exist anywhere in their unit cells as long as point P is an image 
of point P, hence the replacement of P and P with coordinates. 
xzxyx
zzyyxxuu  )'()'()'('   
zzyyvv  )'()'('   
zzww )'('   
Equation 3-5 can be written in terms of translational symmetry 
transformations A,B and C where i, j and k represent the number of unit 
cell periods in the x, y and z directions respectively.  The width, height and 
depth of the unit cell are defined by 2a, 2b and 2c respectively. 
- 45 - 
 aikjiAxx 2),,()'(   
bjkjiByy 2),,()'(   
ckkjiCzz 2),,()'(   
xzxyx
ckbjaiuu  222'   
ckbjvv  22'   
ckww 2'   
One can now use Equation 3-7 to derive the boundary conditions for the six 
faces, twelve edges and eight corners of the unit cell, defined in Figure 3-8, 
by substituting in values for i, j and k.  The boundary conditions for the 
faces, edges and corners are given in Figure 3-9.   
Figure 3-8.  Definition of face, edge and corner labels for a micro unit cell 
- 46 - 
Figure 3-9.  Equations for boundary conditions at faces, edges and corners of the 
unit cell [76] 
Python scripting has again been utilised here, with the knowledge of the 
size of the unit cell, to identify the node labels and nodal coordinates of the 
nodes on the faces, edges and corners of the unit cell.  The nodes are then 
sorted according to their nodal coordinates in the x, y and then z direction 
so that the node labels for a particular face/edge/corner will now be listed 
in a node set systematically.  Linear constraint equations can now be used 
to link a node on one face/edge/corner of the unit cell to the corresponding 
node on the other face/edge/corner.  As meshes on opposite faces have 
been made identical this will create a linear constraint equation on nodes 
on A1 and A2 with the same y and z coordinates, B1 and B2 with the same 
x and z coordinates and C1 and C2 with the same x and y coordinates. 
Dummy nodes are generated in Abaqus to represent the macroscopic 
strains in the linear constraint equations.  By applying a displacement to 
these dummy nodes, which are linked to faces, edges and corners of the 
unit cell through the linear constraint equations; one can apply a direct 
strain to the unit cell.  The applied strain is ramped over the entire 
simulation time to give a constant strain rate test, except in high rate meso 
scale loading due to the numerical instability discussed in section 5.3.3.  
Although the unit cell is subjected to a constant strain rate the individual 
- 47 - 
elements at various locations throughout the unit cell may be subjected to 
a strain rate differing from the desired unit cell strain rate.  The average of 
the strain rate for all the elements, however, compares well to the desired 
unit cell strain rate. 
It is important to note here that this work is capturing strain rate effects 
and is not a study of the stress wave propagation within the unit cells.  The 
movement of stress waves, generated by impact loading, through 
composite materials is complex due to the materials underlying micro and 
meso structure.  The stress waves do not propagate uniformly due to the 
orientation of fibres and different material properties in different directions, 
unlike isotropic materials where the material properties are the same in all 
directions.  The area of stress wave propagation is considered outside the 
scope of this thesis. 
Only one set of boundary conditions is needed for all loading conditions 
such as tension, compression and shear.  To put the cell under different 
loading, a boundary displacement is applied to a different macroscopic 
strain dummy node.  The stress is obtained by dividing the reaction force 
at the dummy node by the volume of the unit cell and the strain is 
obtained from the displacement at the dummy node. 
3.4 Material Models 
Two user defined subroutines have been written in Fortran; one which 
contains material models for all micro scale constituents (matrix, fibre and 
interface) and one which contains material models for all meso scale 
constituents (matrix and yarn), see Figure 3-10 for a summary.  The 
material properties used in these material models are given in Appendix B. 
- 48 - 
Figure 3-10.  Summary of the features of the micro and meso scale constituent 
material models 
The subroutines are called for all element integration points at all time 
increments in the analysis.  The correct material model for the element 
integration point of interest is called by the subroutine based on the 
constituent names. 
At the start of all material models multiple Abaqus variables are defined.  
Some are variables that are just passed in for information, some are 
variables that can be updated and some are variables that must be 
defined.  User defined material properties are read into the material models 
and assigned variable names.  All material models are contained within a 
loop which runs from one to the number of integration points which will be 
the same as the number of elements due to the use of reduced integration 
elements.  In all material models all six components of the current strain 
are calculated with the strain increment variable that is passed in for 
information and the state variable that contains the level of strain from the 
previous time increment.  State variables in user subroutines in Abaqus are 
values that can be defined at each increment in the analysis.  The values 
from the previous increment are made available in the current increment.  
The state variables can be defined as functions of other variables.  
- 49 - 
3.4.1 Matrix Material Model 
This section details the matrix material model in the order that operations 
would be performed after the common features to all material models 
detailed at the start of section 3.4.  The matrix material model is called for 
all element integration points at all time increments in the analysis.  The 
matrix material model is identical for the micro and meso scale analyses. 
Using the current strain level and current simulation time all six 
components of strain rate (three direct and three shear) are calculated.  
From these values numerous maximum strain rate values are calculated. 
The strain rate scaling of stiffness and strength then occurs and is based 
on the logarithmic equation shown in Equation 3-8 [44].       is the rate 
adjusted parameter,    is the quasi static value,   is the effective strain 
rate,    is a quasi static reference strain rate which is set to one and    is 
the strain rate scaling constant for the parameter. 
       (      (
The stiffness is scaled using the maximum strain rate.  If the maximum 
strain rate is a direct strain rate then the Youngs modulus is scaled and 
the shear stiffness is calculated from this using the Poissons ratio.  If the 
maximum strain rate is a shear strain rate then the shear stiffness is scaled 
and the Youngs modulus is calculated from this using the Poissons ratio.  
The matrix material of interest exhibits two distinct regions of strain rate 
dependency [14, 17].  The stiffness scales differently at low and high rates.  
This is implemented in the subroutine with a strain rate threshold where, if 
the strain rate is lower than this threshold, a low strain rate scaling 
constant is used and if the strain rate is higher than this threshold a high 
strain rate scaling constant is used.  This effectively allows a bi-linear 
scaling relationship. 
The tensile strength is scaled based on the maximum positive direct strain 
rate.  The compressive strength is scaled based on the maximum negative 
direct strain rate.  The shear strength is scaled based on the maximum 
shear strain rate, positive or negative.  For all strength scaling a bi-linear 
scaling law is also used in the same manner as stiffness scaling.  No strain 
- 50 - 
rate scaling of stiffness or strength occurs if the strain rate is less than one 
or if the element integration point has had damage initiated.  Strain rate 
scaling of stiffness and strength is performed due to the differences in 
properties of matrix materials at low and high rates of testing, as discussed 
in section 2.2.4.  If this scaling was not performed unit cells would be 
subjected to high rates of loading with stiffness and strength values that 
are only valid at low rates of loading. 
The maximum stress failure criterion is applied by calculating multiple 
stress to strength ratios, using the scaled stiffness and strength values as 
well as the current strain values.  Six stress to strength ratios are 
calculated, three direct and three shear.  The stress to strength ratios are 
calculated by multiplying the stiffness by the current strain, giving stress, 
and then dividing the result by the strength.  The stiffness can be direct or 
shear and then the strain and strength would correspond to this.  The three 
direct stress to strength ratios use tensile or compressive stress depending 
on what loading the current element of interest is subject to.  When any of 
the stress to strength ratios reach or surpass unity then damage is 
initiated.  A summary of the maximum stress failure criterion taken from  
Knight Jr [40] is given is Figure 3-11. 
Figure 3-11.  Summary of the maximum stress failure criterion [40] 
When damage is initiated strain rate scaling ceases to occur and damage 
evolution begins to occur.  The damage evolution in this thesis is based on 
damage mechanics theory by Matzenmiller [42] who developed a 
constitutive model for damage in fibre reinforced composite materials.  The 
researchers used a homogenised continuum for the model where internal 
variables were used to describe the damage evolution under loading as 
- 51 - 
degradation of material stiffness.  The theory lends itself well to 
implementation in finite element codes due to it being a strain-controlled 
continuum model.  However, the effect of reducing the stiffness of 
elements on boundary conditions should be given careful consideration, as 
discussed in section 3.3.   
The damage evolution in this thesis can be thought of as stiffness 
degradation utilising Equations 3-9, 3-10 and 3-11.  The variables in the 
equations are the damage variable, (), the largest value of all the 
maximum stress criteria (    ), the strain softening parameter (m), the 
direct stiffness (E) and the shear stiffness (G).  The direct stiffness and 
shear stiffness is always the strain rate scaled value when damage was 
initiated, not the quasi static value. 
The damage variable varies from zero, no damage, to one, maximum 
damage.  This can be clearly seen in Equations 3-10 and 3-11 where a 
value of zero for the damage variable would give no change in stiffness, 
whereas, a value greater than one would reduce the stiffness.  The rate of 
this stiffness reduction is controlled by the strain softening parameter, m, 
which can give post elastic responses ranging from sudden degradation 
through to gradual stiffness degradation as seen in Figure 3-12.  A positive 
value of m gives a reduction in stiffness, a negative value of m gives an 
increase in stiffness and a value of zero gives a perfectly plastic response.  
The material model is coded in such a way that the damage variable can 
never decrease i.e. no healing of material can occur.  Also the damage 
variable is limited to 0.99 to avoid any numerical errors when dividing by 
zero.  At this value of 0.99 the stiffness of the element will be extremely 
low which can cause excessive distortion, hence, at this point the element 
is deleted from the analysis. 
- 52 - 
Figure 3-12.  Control of post elastic response using strain softening parameter (m) 
The penultimate step in the matrix constituent section of the VUMAT is to 
calculate the 6x6 isotropic compliance matrix and then perform matrix 
inversion to calculate the 6x6 stiffness matrix.  The stiffness values at this 
stage may or may not have gone through strain rate scaling and damage 
evolution.  The final step is to use the stiffness matrix and the current 
strain values in a column matrix (1x6) to calculate the new stress column 
matrix (1x6) through matrix multiplication. 
3.4.2 Fibre Material Model 
This section details the fibre material model in the order that operations 
would be performed after the common features to all material models 
detailed at the start of section 3.4.  The fibre material model is called for all 
element integration points at all time increments in the analysis.  The fibre 
material model is used at the micro scale of analysis.  
The stress in the longitudinal fibre direction is compared to the tensile / 
compressive strength of the fibre depending on the type of loading.  If the 
fibre strength is exceeded then the element deletion state variable is set to 
zero.  A value of one indicates the integration point is still active in the 
analysis and a value of zero indicates the integration point has been 
- 53 - 
deleted from the analysis, giving a brittle failure.  The initial value of the 
element deletion sate variable is one. 
Assuming the element has not been deleted from the analysis the next 
step in the fibre constituent section of the VUMAT is to calculate the 6x6 
stiffness matrix for a transversely isotropic material.  The new stress state 
is then calculated through matrix multiplication of the stiffness matrix with 
the column strain matrix. 
3.4.3 Interface Material Model 
This section details the interface material model in the order that 
operations would be performed after the common features to all material 
models detailed at the start of section 3.4.  The interface material model is 
called for all element integration points at all time increments in the 
analysis.  The interface material model is used at the micro scale of 
analysis. The differences between the matrix and interface material models 
are that the interface fails based on longitudinal shear strength only, 
whereas the matrix considers failure in all loading, and the interface fails 
through element deletion not damage evolution. 
Using the current strain level and current simulation time all six 
components of strain rate (three direct and three shear) are calculated.    
From these values numerous maximum strain rate values are calculated. 
The strain rate scaling of the interface stiffness is performed in an identical 
manner to the matrix material model.  The strain rate scaling of the 
interfacial shear strength is based on Equation 3-8, a single strain rate 
scaling constant (i.e. no bi-linear scaling) and the longitudinal shear strain 
rate in the fibre direction. 
The shear stress in the longitudinal fibre direction is compared to the 
interfacial shear strength.  If the interfacial shear strength is exceeded 
then the element deletion state variable is set to zero.  A value of one 
indicates the integration point is still active in the analysis and a value of 
zero indicates the integration point has been deleted from the analysis, 
giving brittle shear failure at the interface. 
- 54 - 
The penultimate step in the interface constituent section of the VUMAT, 
assuming the element has not been deleted from the analysis, is to 
calculate the 6x6 isotropic compliance matrix and then perform matrix 
inversion to calculate the 6x6 stiffness matrix.  The final step is to calculate 
the new stress state through matrix multiplication of the stiffness matrix 
with the column strain matrix. 
3.4.4 Yarn Material Model 
This section details the yarn material model in the order that operations 
would be performed after the common features to all material models 
detailed at the start of section 3.4.  The yarn material model is called for all 
element integration points at all time increments in the analysis.  The yarn 
material model is used at the meso scale of analysis.  The material 
properties used in the yarn material model come from the modelling results 
at the micro scale. 
Using the current strain level and current simulation time all six 
components of strain rate (three direct and three shear) are calculated.  
From these values numerous maximum strain rate values are calculated. 
The strain rate scaling of all strength values (longitudinal tensile, 
longitudinal compressive, transverse tensile, transverse compressive and 
shear strengths) is based on Equation 3-8, the maximum strain rate and 
one strain rate scaling constant (i.e. no bi-linear scaling as with the matrix 
material model) which is the same value for all strengths.  The strain rate 
scaling of stiffness (longitudinal, transverse and shear values) is based on 
Equation 3-8, the maximum strain rate and one strain rate scaling constant 
(i.e. no bi-linear scaling as with the matrix material model) which is 
different for longitudinal, transverse and shear stiffness scaling. 
The damage initiation, damage evolution and final stress state calculations 
are then performed as described in section 3.4.1.  The difference, due to 
the transversely isotropic nature of the yarns, is that (a) a strain softening 
parameter is selected based on the largest maximum stress criteria, (b) 
further Poissons ratios are calculated and (c) the stiffness reduction in 
Equations 3-10 and 3-11 is applied to all stiffness values (longitudinal, 
transverse and shear). 
- 55 - 
3.5 Implementation in Abaqus 
Finite element modelling can be split into three broad steps; pre-
processing, solver and post-processing.  Pre-processing is the stage where 
a simulation is fully defined in terms of part geometry, assembly 
definitions, material properties, analysis steps, interactions, loads, 
boundary conditions, mesh generation etc.  All this information is utilised to 
create an input file that can be sent and analysed in a solver.  The solver 
will generate an output file that contains all the desired results, e.g. 
stresses and strains, within a particular model.  This output file can be 
analysed in the post-processing stage to obtain the desired information. 
The finite element package utilised in this work is Abaqus, a DS SIMULIA 
product where SIMULIA is the DS (Dassault Systmes) brand that delivers 
the Abaqus product.  Abaqus/CAE, in conjunction with Python scripting, is 
used in the pre and post-processing stage and Abaqus/Explicit, in 
conjunction with Fortran coded user defined material models, is used in 
simulations as the solver. 
One can use the Abaqus/CAE graphical user interface (GUI) to perform 
various tasks to set up a simulation in the pre-processing stage.  Upon 
performing these tasks one would execute numerous operations by 
interacting with the GUI e.g. selecting a surface on a model to apply a 
boundary condition.  Each operation executed in the GUI internally 
generates commands in an object oriented programming language called 
Python.  These commands are sent to the Abaqus/CAE kernel.  The kernel, 
the brains of Abaqus/CAE, interprets the commands and performs the task 
you selected.  The GUI can be thought of as the interface between the user 
and the kernel.  Python scripting allows direct communication with the 
kernel, effectively bypassing the GUI.  One can create a file containing 
Python commands to perform the same tasks as you would perform using 
the GUI.  The key advantage of using Python scripting is the ability to 
automate repetitive tasks whether this is in the generation of a model or 
submission of multiple jobs.  The integration of Python scripting into 
Abaqus is shown in diagrammatic form in Figure 3-13. 
- 56 - 
Figure 3-13.  Abaqus pre-processing, solver and post-processing information 
transfer [43] 
The Abaqus/Explicit solver works on an input file created in the pre-
processing stage and generates an output file for the post-processing 
stage, seen in Figure 3-13.  The Abaqus documentation [43] gives detailed 
information on explicit dynamic analyses as well as the following general 
overview: 
The explicit dynamics procedure performs a large number of small time 
increments efficiently. An explicit central-difference time integration rule is 
used; each increment is relatively inexpensive (compared to the direct-
integration dynamic analysis procedure available in Abaqus/Standard) 
because there is no solution for a set of simultaneous equations. The 
explicit central-difference operator satisfies the dynamic equilibrium 
equations at the beginning of the increment, t; the accelerations calculated 
at time t are used to advance the velocity solution to time t + t/2 and the 
displacement solution to time t + t. 
- 57 - 
Gutkin and Pinho [77] focused on the modelling techniques for failure of 
carbon/epoxy composite materials.  The authors implemented physically 
based failure criteria models in implicit and explicit user defined 
subroutines in Abaqus.  An open hole tension laminate model with layup 
[90/0/45]3S was subjected to a displacement rate of 10mm/s.  The 
implicit model took three times as long to run as the explicit model. 
The explicit procedure discussed earlier is implemented with a user defined 
subroutine which is executed at every step of the analysis and is written in 
the programming language Fortran.  A user subroutine to define material 
behaviour in the Abaqus/Explicit product is called a VUMAT.  A VUMAT can 
be used to define the mechanical constitutive behaviour of a material and 
is called for blocks of material calculation points at all time increments in 
the analysis.  The VUMAT can use and update solution dependent state 
variables and use any field variables that are passed in for information.  
For example, a solution dependent state variable could be a damage 
variable that varies from zero to one where zero indicates no damage and 
one indicates maximum damage.  This damage variable which is a solution 
dependent state variable could be based on a field variable that has been 
passed in for information, such as a particular component of strain.  The 
state variables are of particular importance as this information will be 
carried forward to the following time increment in the analysis.  In this 
thesis the VUMAT is used to define mechanical constitutive behaviour, 
initiate damage, evolve damage and include strain rate dependence. 
In the post-processing stage the output files can be viewed in Abaqus/CAE 
and results in terms of stress strain curves produced manually within the 
GUI.  Python scripting can again be utilised here to automate the repetitive 
task of generating stress strain curves for multiple simulations. 
All simulations were run on either a powerful desktop computer (two quad 
core Intel Xeon CPU E5520 2.27GHz processors, 32 GB RAM and Microsoft 
Windows XP Professional x64 Edition operating system) or The University 
of Nottingham High Performance Computer (HPC).  
- 58 - 
4 Micro Scale Modelling 
4.1 Introduction 
This chapter involves the numerical simulation and prediction of high strain 
rate material properties of unidirectional composite fibre bundles.  
Specifically the modelling takes place at the micro scale where fibres 
surrounded by an interfacial layer are embedded in a matrix material.  
Finite element analysis of carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy micro scale 
unit cells provides the high strain rate properties of carbon/epoxy and S2 
glass/epoxy meso scale yarns / fibre bundles. 
The chapter first details some micrograph work followed by some modelling 
studies that have been conducted to obtain certain modelling parameters 
and to gain confidence in the user defined material models, as described in 
3.4.  Following this, micro scale modelling results are presented for both 
carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy unit cells.  The unit cells have been 
tested in longitudinal tension, longitudinal compression, transverse tension, 
transverse compression, longitudinal shear and transverse shear loading.  
Each loading condition has been tested over a range of strain rates from 1 
/s to 10000 /s.  The analysis of the data is then presented which ultimately 
provides high strain rate material properties for use in meso scale 
modelling.  The chapter is concluded with a detailed discussion of the 
results. 
4.2 Micro Scale Micrograph Analyses 
4.2.1 Fibre Diameter Study 
This section presents the results of the fibre diameter measurement 
process described in section 3.2.1.  The S2 glass and carbon fibre 
diameters, shown in Figure 4-1, were found to be 12.1m (standard 
deviation of 1.1m) and 8.94m (standard deviation of 0.5m) 
respectively.  This compared to values of 11m for E glass, different grade 
to S2, and 8m carbon reported in Hull and Clyne [9]. 
- 59 - 
Figure 4-1.  Optical micrographs of cross sections of unidirectional carbon/epoxy 
(left) and S2 glass/epoxy (right) yarns 
The variability in fibre diameter is partly due to the human error inherently 
involved in the measurement process.  In the image analysis software 
ImageJ [73] a line is drawn across the diameter of a fibre, the number of 
pixels along this line is then measured and using the scale of the 
micrograph an image a length in m is calculated.  This obviously relies on 
the user of the software to accurately draw the line in the correct position 
at the start and end of the fibre and directly across the diameter.  The 
edge of the fibres can be blurred as seen in Figure 4-2, depending on the 
magnification of the micrograph, hence a difficulty is encountered with 
identifying the start and end of the fibre.   
Figure 4-2.  Zoomed micrograph image of the cross section of one individual carbon 
fibre approximately 1000 pixels in diameter 
- 60 - 
Also in a unidirectional material not all fibres will be perfectly aligned at 
zero degrees i.e. in a micrograph they will not be coming directly out of 
the image as seen in Figure 4-3.  This is due a combination of the inability 
to achieve 100% alignment of fibres in the manufacturing process and the 
inability to perfectly cut the laminate perpendicular to the fibre direction for 
microscope analysis samples.  This leads to some fibres appearing slightly 
elliptical rather than circular.  This is not an issue in measuring the fibre 
diameter as the shortest length of the ellipse will always be the fibre 
diameter and it is this length that has been measured for the results in this 
thesis. 
Figure 4-3. Typical features resulting from the angular variation in unidirectional 
continuous reinforced polymers.  Five segmented fibres are shown where A, B and C 
are located within channels separating fibre bundles and D and E are located next to 
each other and within fibre bundles.  
4.2.2 Fibre Volume Fraction Study 
This section presents the results of the fibre volume fraction measurement 
process described in section 3.2.1.  The fibre volume fractions within the 
yarn boundaries for the carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy yarns were 
found to be 66.28% and 54.32% respectively.  As the volume fraction in 
the yarn was calculated for multiple thin vertical columns of area across 
the width of the yarn, explained in 3.2.1, a histogram can be created 
putting the volume fraction of each thin column in a certain numerical 
- 61 - 
range on the x axis, shown in Figure 4-4 for the carbon/epoxy yarn and 
Figure 4-5 for the S2 glass/epoxy yarn.   
The two plots effectively show how much the volume fraction varies across 
the width of the yarn.  The mean value of the volume fraction of the thin 
vertical columns is shown in the top left of the figures with a standard 
deviation.  This standard deviation shows how much the volume fraction of 
the thin vertical columns varies from the mean value.  A lower standard 
deviation in the carbon yarn than in the S2 glass yarn indicates less 
variation in the volume fraction across the width of the yarn, i.e. a more 
consistent packing of fibres.  This is also intuitively seen from the shape of 
the graphs where the carbon plot has a narrow bell shape and the S2 glass 
plot has wider bell shape. 
Figure 4-4.  Histogram showing count against volume fraction for the carbon/epoxy 
- 62 - 
Figure 4-5.  Histogram showing count against volume fraction for the S2 
glass/epoxy yarn 
4.3 Micro Scale Modelling Studies 
4.3.1 Mesh Sensitivity Study 
A mesh sensitivity study was conducted on a carbon/epoxy micro scale unit 
cell as described in 3.2.1 with the measured fibre diameter from the 
previous section and the fibre spacing defined by the measured fibre 
volume fraction.  The mesh sensitivity study was performed on the 
carbon/epoxy unit cell as the fibre volume fraction is higher, hence, the 
fibre spacing is smaller which requires a denser mesh.  A suitable mesh for 
the carbon/epoxy unit cell will be more than suitable for the S2 
glass/epoxy unit cell.  The unit cell was tested at six different mesh 
densities in transverse tension at 10000/s.  Transverse tension was chosen 
so the effect of mesh density could be observed on not only the stiffness 
and strength but also the post elastic damage response.  The unit cell was 
tested at a high strain rate of 10000 /s for speed of analysis.  The effect of 
mesh density on the stress strain response is presented in Figure 4-6. 
- 63 - 
Figure 4-6.  Stress strain response of a carbon epoxy micro unit cell with six 
different mesh densities, number of elements shown in legend, subjected to 
transverse tension at 10000 /s.  The unit cell is shown with a mesh containing 2898 
elements. 
The stiffness of the unit cell and stress at which damage is initiated does 
not change significantly with increasing mesh density.  The difference in 
the stress strain responses is seen in the post elastic region.  The three 
coarsest and three finest meshes produce two types of post elastic 
response.  The three finer meshes have a post elastic response where more 
stiffness degradation of elements has taken place.  The difference in the 
post elastic response between the three coarsest and the three finest 
meshes would correspond to a different strain softening parameter, m, 
which controls the rate of stiffness degradation after damage initiation, see 
Figure 3-12.  The difference in this m value would be very small, less than 
1.0, and when parameters are averaged for use in larger scales of analysis 
this would most likely prove insignificant 
The simulation run times for some of the finer meshes are too long when it 
is taken into consideration that there are multiple materials, scales of 
analysis, loading conditions and strain rates to be tested.  The long run 
times can be attributed to two main factors; material models and boundary 
conditions.  An increased number of elements means more integration 
points for the complex user defined subroutines.  An increased number of 
elements also means more nodes on surfaces and edges which leads to 
- 64 - 
more linear constraint equations to implement periodic boundary 
conditions. 
Taking the above discussion points into consideration it was decided to run 
with a coarser mesh density, 2898 elements for the carbon/epoxy micro 
scale unit cell. 
4.3.2 Mass Scaling Study 
Mass scaling involves adding nonphysical mass to the model in order to 
achieve a larger stable time step and, therefore, reduced simulation run 
times.  The technique should only be used when the addition of the 
nonphysical mass does not significantly affect the overall results.  A S2 
glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell was tested in transverse tension with 
increasing density values from the original value.  From the results the 
maximum mass scaling that could be used without affecting the results was 
when the density was multiplied by 1e9.  This appropriate level of mass 
scaling was chosen to be used for the micro simulations at the lowest strain 
rate where long simulations run times were expected. 
4.3.3 Fibre Strength Study 
This study was conducted to gain confidence in the material models, 
described in 3.4.  Changes were made in the fibre constituent material 
properties where the resulting unit cell response would be predictable, 
hence, it could be ascertained if the material models were capturing 
realistic material behaviour. A S2 glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell was 
tested in transverse tension, longitudinal tension and transverse shear.  All 
tests were at a strain rate of 10000 /s for speed of analysis, the material 
models were not altered in any way so strain rate effects were still 
included.  Each test was conducted with a low tensile/compressive fibre 
strength (-10% normal strength), the normal fibre tensile/compressive 
strength and a high fibre tensile/compressive strength (+10% normal 
strength).  In terms of the stress strain response there was no change in 
transverse tension and transverse shear loading responses.  In longitudinal 
tension the strength of the unit cell increased with increasing fibre strength 
as shown in Figure 4-7.  This is what one would expect and is generally in 
line with changes in fibre strength. 
- 65 - 
Figure 4-7.  Stress strain curves of S2 glass epoxy micro unit cell in longitudinal 
tension at 10000 /s with low, normal and high tensile and compressive fibre 
strength 
4.3.4 Interface Strength Study 
This study was conducted to gain confidence in the material models, 
described in 3.4.  Changes were made in the interface constituent material 
properties where the resulting unit cell response would be predictable, 
hence, it could be ascertained if the material models were capturing 
realistic material behaviour. A S2 glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell was 
tested in transverse tension, longitudinal tension and longitudinal shear.  
All tests were at a strain rate of 10000 /s for speed of analysis, the 
material models were not altered in any way so strain rate effects were still 
included.  Each test was conducted with a low interfacial shear strength (-
10% normal strength), the normal interfacial shear strength and a high 
interfacial shear strength (+10% normal strength).  In terms of stress 
strain response there was no change in transverse tension and longitudinal 
tension loading responses.  In longitudinal shear, as expected, the strength 
of the unit cell increased with increasing interfacial shear strength as 
shown in Figure 4-8. 
- 66 - 
Figure 4-8.  Stress strain curves of S2 glass epoxy micro unit cell in longitudinal 
shear at 10000 /s with low, normal and high interfacial shear strength 
4.3.5 Interface Thickness Study 
This study was conducted to gain confidence in the material models, 
described in 3.4.  Changes were made in the interface constituents 
geometry where the resulting unit cell response would be predictable, 
hence, it could be ascertained if the material models were capturing 
realistic material behaviour.  A S2 glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell was 
tested in transverse tension, longitudinal tension and longitudinal shear, 
see Figure 4-9.  All tests were at a strain rate of 10000 /s for speed of 
analysis, the material models were not altered in any way so strain rate 
effects were still included.  Each test was conducted with an interface 
thickness equal to the fibre radius (r) divided by 20 (thin), 10 (normal) and 
5 (thick).  In all three loading conditions the stiffness is increased as the 
interface becomes thinner, this is due to there being more stiff fibre 
material present in the unit cell.  The fibre volume fractions for the thin 
(r/20), normal (r/10) and thick (r/5) interfaces are 57%, 54% and 48% 
respectively.  In transverse tension and longitudinal shear the strength and 
shape of the stress strain curves are similar for all three interface 
thicknesses.  In longitudinal tension the strength and shape of the stress 
strain curve is similar for the thin (r/20) and normal (r/10) interface 
thickness.  However, in longitudinal tension with a thick interface (r/5) the 
failure mechanism changes, instead of all fibres and interfaces failing at the 
same time (as for thin and normal interface thicknesses) the central fibre 
- 67 - 
and interface fails first followed by the corner fibres and interfaces.  This 
generates a two-step failure process seen in the stress strain response. 
Figure 4-9.  Stress strain curves of S2 glass epoxy micro unit cell in three loading 
conditions with a thin, normal and thick interface layer 
4.3.6 Damage Evolution Study 
This study was conducted to gain confidence in the material models, 
described in 3.4.  Changes were made in the matrix constituent material 
properties where the resulting unit cell response would be predictable, 
hence, it could be ascertained if the material models were capturing 
realistic material behaviour.  A S2 glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell was 
tested in transverse tension, longitudinal tension and transverse shear.  All 
tests were at a strain rate of 10000 /s for speed of analysis, the material 
models were not altered in any way so strain rate effects were still 
included.  Each test was conducted with a matrix strain softening 
- 68 - 
parameter, m, of 0.1, 1 and 10.  The strain softening parameter controls 
how the epoxy resin matrix behaves post damage initiation.  A value of 0.1 
gives a very slow rate of stiffness reduction (ductile) after damage 
initiation, whereas, a value of 10 gives a very high rate of stiffness 
reduction (brittle).   
In terms of the unit cell stress strain response there was no change in 
longitudinal tension loading as this is a fibre dominated response and 
damage evolution occurs in the matrix constituent only.  Transverse 
tension and transverse shear loading demonstrated a similar change in 
stress strain response with a change in the value of m; due to both loading 
modes being matrix dominated.  This change is discussed for transverse 
tension with reference to Figure 4-10. 
Figure 4-10.  Stress strain curves for S2 glass epoxy micro unit cell in transverse 
tension at 10000 /s with different values for the strain softening parameter (m).  
The state of damage in the physical model is also shown at five different levels of 
strain (A, B, C, D and E).  Red indicates maximum damage and blue indicates no 
damage. 
- 69 - 
Damage initiation occurs at the same location, horizontally between the 
fibres, in the micro unit cell in all three transverse tension simulations.  
This damage initiation also occurs at the same stress value, point A in  
Figure 4-10, due to the maximum stress criterion. 
The damage evolution that occurs after damage initiation then differs in all 
three transverse tension simulations due to the different values for the 
strain softening parameter, m.  With an m value of 10 the stiffness is 
rapidly degraded to such a point that some elements are at maximum 
damage.  At this point the elements are deleted from the analysis, causing 
a physical crack path.  This creates the large drop off in stress.  The 
damage at this point has not had chance to create a crack path through the 
entire unit cell so it still has some ability to carry load, hence the step in 
the curve.  As the loading continues the crack eventually bridges the 
entirety of the unit cell and the stress drops off to zero as the unit cell can 
no longer carry any load.  With an m value of 0.1 the stiffness is degraded 
at a very slow rate, so much in fact that the stress continues to rise until it 
eventually plateaus off as more and more elements become damaged.  No 
elements reach maximum damage and hence none are deleted from the 
analysis so there is no abrupt drop in stress.  The rate of stiffness 
degradation for an m value of 1 is between the other two simulations.  The 
stress gradually reduces after damage initiation and then drops off abruptly 
to zero.  This abrupt drop off occurs for the same reason as in the 
simulation with an m value of 10, some elements having reached 
maximum damage are, therefore, deleted from the analysis.  The 
explanations given here also apply to transverse shear loading as 
mentioned previously at the start of this section.  It is clear that from this 
study that in matrix dominated loading modes the matrix strain softening 
parameter has a significant effect on the shape of the post elastic stress 
strain curve of the micro unit cell. 
4.3.7 Transverse Tension Study 
A S2 glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell was tested in tension in the two 
transverse directions (X and Y) to ascertain if there would be any 
differences in the mechanical response.  Tests were conducted at 1, 1000 
and 10000 /s.  The results in terms of the stress strain responses are 
shown in Figure 4-11.  The stiffness values in X and Y transverse tension 
- 70 - 
are the same, however, the strength in Y transverse tension is typically 
30% greater than in X transverse tension at all three strain rates tested. 
Figure 4-11.  Stress strain curves for S2 glass/epoxy micro unit cells in X (blue) and 
Y (red) transverse tension.  The strain rates tested were 1/s (solid line), 1000/s 
(dotted line) and 10000/s (dashed line). 
The other difference between X and Y transvere tension is that damage 
initiates in different locations in the unit cell as shown in Figure 4-12.  In X 
transverse tension, the damage initiates horizontally between the fibres, 
whereas, in Y transverse tension the damage intiates diagonally between 
the fibres.   The damage then also propagates in a different manner, with X 
tension damage moving vertically through the unit cell and Y tension 
damage moving horizonally through the unit cell. 
- 71 - 
Figure 4-12.  Damage in X and Y transverse tension loading at 10000/s.  Red 
indicates maximum damage and blue indicates no damage. 
Figure 4-13 helps to explain the initial location of damage in the two 
transverse tension loading conditions.  In X loading the largest stress in the 
matrix is horizontally in between the fibres, whereas, in Y loading it is 
diagonally in between the fibres.  This confirms the location of the damage 
as observed in Figure 4-12. 
Figure 4-13.  Initial von Mises stress state of the micro unit cell subjected to X 
transverse tension (left) and Y transverse tension (right).  Red indicates high stress 
and blue indicates low stress. 
These results are also reported elsewhere in the literature.  A good 
comparison is seen with work done by Maligno [78].  Unit cells were tested 
in both X and Y transverse tension under quasi-static loading, with damage 
initiation and damage evolution also being modelled.  The results showed 
the following comparable points with the work presented above; (a) a 
- 72 - 
higher strength, by around 30%, in Y transverse tension than X transverse 
tension, (b) identical stiffness values in X and Y transverse tension,  (c) 
damage initiation horizontally between the fibres in X transverse tension 
and diagonally between the fibres in Y transverse tension and finally (d) 
damage evolution vertically through the unit cell in X transverse tension 
and horizontally through the unit cell in Y transverse tension.   
The results on location of damage initiation and the direction of damage 
evolution presented by Maligno [78] are shown in Figure 4-14.  The results 
in Figure 4-14 compare well to those in Figure 4-12.  It is important to note 
that the results in Figure 4-14 are for quarter hexagonally packed unit 
cells, so some visualization (translations and rotations) is required to 
compare directly with Figure 4-12. 
Figure 4-14.  Damage initiation and evolution under uniaxial transverse tensile 
loading in X direction (top) and Y direction (bottom).  Reproduced from [78] 
- 73 - 
For square fibre packing the stiffnesss and strengths in the X and Y 
transverse directional would be identical, unlike the hexagonal packing 
where the stiffnesss are the same and the strengths are different.  
Hexagonal packing has been used in this thesis due to the larger 
theoretical maximum fibre volume fraction that can be obtained; 90.7% for 
hexagonal compared to 78.5% for square. 
In this thesis the properties resulting from micro x and y transverse loading 
are averaged for use as transverse meso scale yarn properties as detailed 
in Figure 4-36.  
- 74 - 
4.4 Micro Scale Modelling Results 
This section presents the results of the carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy 
micro scale modelling.  The unit cells for both materials have been tested 
in several loading conditions, which are demonstrated in Figure 4-15, and 
at strain rates of 1, 1000 and 10000 /s. 
Figure 4-15.  Micro scale unit cell loading conditions.  (a) transverse x tension, (b) 
transverse x compression, (c) transverse y tension, (d) transverse y compression, 
(e) longitudinal z tension, (f) longitudinal z compression, (g) transverse xy shear 
and (h) longitudinal xz shear.  The example unit cells are carbon micro scale unit 
cells with a deformation scale factors applied. 
4.4.1 Carbon/Epoxy 
The stress strain responses for the carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cell are 
presented in Figure 4-16 for transverse loading in the x direction, Figure 
4-17 for transverse loading in the y direction, Figure 4-18 for longitudinal 
loading and Figure 4-19 for shear loading.  For each loading condition the 
von Mises stress contour plots are shown in Figure 4-20 and the damage 
variable contour plots are shown in Figure 4-21.  These results are 
discussed in sections 4.5 and 4.5.2 along with the S2 glass/epoxy results 
from section 4.4.2. 
- 75 - 
Figure 4-16.  Stress strain curves for carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cell in 
transverse tension and transverse compression, in the X direction, at strain rates of 
1 (green), 1000 (red) and 10000 (blue) /s 
Figure 4-17.  Stress strain curves for carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cell in 
transverse tension and transverse compression, in the Y direction, at strain rates of 
1 (green), 1000 (red) and 10000 (blue) /s 
- 76 - 
Figure 4-18.  Stress strain curves for carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cell in 
longitudinal tension and longitudinal compression, in the Z direction, at strain rates 
of 1 (green), 1000 (red) and 10000 (blue) /s 
Figure 4-19.  Stress strain curves for carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cell in 
transverse XY and longitudinal XZ shear at strain rates of 1 (green), 1000 (red) and 
10000 (blue) /s 
- 77 - 
Figure 4-20.  Carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cell von Mises stress contours for first 
step of analysis (reflecting the stress distribution throughout the elastic region) at 
10000/s in (a) transverse x tension, (b) transverse x compression, (c) transverse y 
tension, (d) transverse y compression, (e) longitudinal z tension, (f) longitudinal z 
compression, (g) transverse xy shear and (h) longitudinal xz shear.  Units are given 
in GPa 
- 78 - 
Figure 4-21.  Carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage 
varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) which indicates 
maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in (a) transverse x tension, (b) transverse x 
compression, (c) transverse y tension, (d) transverse y compression, (e) transverse 
xy shear, (f) longitudinal xz shear, (g) longitudinal z tension and (h) longitudinal z 
compression.  Each loading condition has three stages of damage shown; initial, 
intermediate and final except for longitudinal loading where only two stages of 
damage are shown.  Each loading condition is shown at a strain rate of 10000/s 
which is representative of damage at all strain rates.   
- 79 - 
4.4.2 S2 Glass/Epoxy 
The stress strain responses for the S2 glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell are 
presented in Figure 4-22 for transverse loading in the x direction, Figure 
4-23 for transverse loading in the y direction, Figure 4-24 for longitudinal 
loading, and Figure 4-25 for shear loading.  For each loading condition the 
von Mises stress contour plots are shown in Figure 4-26 and the damage 
variable contour plots are shown in Figure 4-27.  These results are 
discussed in sections 4.5 and 4.5.2 along with the carbon/epoxy results 
from section 4.4.1. 
Figure 4-22.  Stress strain curves for S2 glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell in 
transverse tension and transverse compression, in the X direction, at strain rates of 
1 (green), 1000 (red) and 10000 (blue) /s 
Figure 4-23.  Stress strain curves for S2 glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell in 
transverse tension and transverse compression, in the Y direction, at strain rates of 
1 (green), 1000 (red) and 10000 (blue) /s 
- 80 - 
Figure 4-24.  Stress strain curves for S2 glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell in 
longitudinal tension and longitudinal compression, in the Z direction, at strain rates 
of 1 (green), 1000 (red) and 10000 (blue) /s 
Figure 4-25.  Stress strain curves for S2 glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell in 
transverse XY and longitudinal XZ shear at strain rates of 1 (green), 1000 (red) and 
10000 (blue) /s 
- 81 - 
Figure 4-26.  S2 glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell von Mises stress contours for first 
step of analysis (reflecting the stress distribution throughout the elastic region) at 
10000/s in (a) transverse x tension, (b) transverse x compression, (c) transverse y 
tension, (d) transverse y compression, (e) longitudinal z tension, (f) longitudinal z 
compression, (g) transverse xy shear and (h) longitudinal xz shear.  Units are given 
in GPa 
- 82 - 
Figure 4-27.  S2 glass/epoxy micro scale unit cell damage variable contours.  
Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) which 
indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in (a) transverse x tension, (b) 
transverse x compression, (c) transverse y tension, (d) transverse y compression, 
(e) transverse xy shear, (f) longitudinal xz shear, (g) longitudinal z tension and (h) 
longitudinal z compression.  Each loading condition has three stages of damage 
shown; initial, intermediate and final except for longitudinal loading where only two 
stages of damage are shown.  Each loading condition is shown at a strain rate of 
10000/s which is representative of damage at all strain rates.   
- 83 - 
4.5 Micro Scale Modelling Discussion 
4.5.1 Elastic and Damage Response 
For both S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cells in all 
loading conditions at all strain rates the stress strain response initially 
shows linear elastic behaviour. 
Figure 4-28.  Shapes of stress strain curves seen in micro scale modelling results. 
Matrix Dominated Loading Modes 
For both S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cells in 
transverse X tension, transverse Y tension and transverse XY shear, i.e. 
matrix dominated loading modes, the stress strain responses at all strain 
rates shows elastic behaviour followed by a section of gradual decreasing 
gradient with the shape shown in Figure 4-28 (a).  This is ductile failure.  
This is shown in the stress strain curves for carbon/epoxy in Figure 4-16, 
Figure 4-17 and Figure 4-19 and for S2 glass/epoxy in Figure 4-22, Figure 
4-23 and Figure 4-25.  The section of gradual decreasing gradient, or strain 
softening, is a result of matrix damage accumulation seen physically in the 
damage contour plots for carbon/epoxy in Figure 4-21 (a), (c) and (e) and 
for S2 glass/epoxy in Figure 4-27 (a), (c) and (e).  The amount and 
severity of damaged elements increases as the unit cell is subjected to 
larger strains and, as detailed in section 3.4.1, the matrix elements are 
damaged by gradually reducing their stiffness which results in a gradual 
reduction of stiffness in the unit cell stress strain response.  In transverse 
X tension, Figure 4-21 (a) for carbon/epoxy and Figure 4-27 (a) for S2 
glass/epoxy, the damage initiates horizontally between the fibres and 
proceeds to grow vertically eventually causing a crack across the entire 
height of the unit cell at larger values of strain.  In transverse Y tension, 
Figure 4-21 (c) for carbon/epoxy and Figure 4-27 (c) for S2 glass/epoxy, 
the damage initiates diagonally between the fibres and proceeds to grow 
horizontally eventually causing a crack across the entire width of the unit 
- 84 - 
cell at larger values of strain.  These results reflect the directional strength 
response discussed in section 4.3.7.  In transverse XY shear, Figure 4-21 
(e) for carbon/epoxy and Figure 4-27 (e) for S2 glass/epoxy, the damage 
initiates as horizontal lines, curving around the fibres, across the width of 
the unit cell and grows into all areas of the matrix at larger values of 
strain. 
For S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cells in transverse X 
compression and transverse Y compression the stress strain response at all 
strain rates is similar to that described for transverse X tension, transverse 
Y tension and transverse XY shear, however, the gradual decreasing 
gradient section is less gradual.  The general shape of the stress strain 
curve is more like that shown in Figure 4-28 (b).  The stress strain curves 
for transverse X and Y compression are shown in Figure 4-16 and Figure 
4-17 for carbon/epoxy and Figure 4-22 and Figure 4-23 for S2 glass epoxy.  
As with transverse tension the transverse compression damage is a result 
of matrix damage accumulation.  In transverse X and Y compression the 
damage initiates and evolves in a similar pattern to transverse X and Y 
tension respectively.  The damage contour plots for transverse X 
compression can be seen in Figure 4-21 (b) for carbon/epoxy and Figure 
4-27 (b) for S2 glass/epoxy.  The damage contour plots for transverse Y 
compression can be seen in Figure 4-21 (d) for carbon/epoxy and Figure 
4-27 (d) for S2 glass/epoxy. 
It may initially seem strange that the stiffness degradation is less gradual 
in transverse compression than transverse tension as the strain softening 
parameter is the same for tension, compression and shear.  However, in 
transverse compression, not transverse tension, after the maximum 
strength has been reached some matrix elements fail in shear.  The shear 
strength (50MPa) is much lower than the compression strength (131MPa) 
so the elements reach maximum damage quickly and are deleted from the 
analysis.  This gives some step drops in stress in the transverse 
compression stress strain curves.  A good example of this is shown for the 
S2 glass/epoxy unit cell in Figure 4-22.  The shape of the stress strain 
curves (at all strain rates) for transverse x compression is very similar to 
the transverse x tension stress strain curves for a few percent of strain 
after initial failure, where the elastic region finishes.  There are then a few 
step drops in the stress in transverse compression due to the shear failure 
- 85 - 
discussed previously.  This shear failure does not occur in transverse 
tension, the matrix elements just continue to be stretched for the full 
duration of the simulation. 
Fibre and Interface Dominated Loading Modes 
For S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cells in longitudinal 
tension, longitudinal compression and longitudinal XZ shear the stress 
strain responses at all strain rates shows elastic behaviour followed by an 
abrupt, instant reduction in stiffness as in Figure 4-28 (c).  This is brittle 
failure.  The stress strain curves for longitudinal tension and compression 
are shown in Figure 4-18 for carbon/epoxy and Figure 4-24 for S2 
glass/epoxy.  The stress strain curves for longitudinal XZ shear are shown 
in Figure 4-19 for carbon/epoxy and Figure 4-25 for S2 glass/epoxy.  The 
abrupt instant reduction in stiffness is due to failure in the fibres for 
longitudinal tension and compression as shown in the damage contour 
plots in Figure 4-21 (g) and (h) for carbon/epoxy and Figure 4-27 (g) and 
(h) for S2 glass/epoxy.  By contrast, the abrupt instant reduction of 
stiffness is due to interface failure for longitudinal XZ shear as shown in the 
damage contour plots in Figure 4-21 (f) for carbon/epoxy Figure 4-27 (f) 
for S2 glass/epoxy.  The failure in both cases is abrupt and instant as the 
fibre and interface material models perform element deletion as soon as 
damage is initiated; see sections 3.4.2 and 3.4.3 for information on the 
fibre and interface material models respectively. 
For both carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy in longitudinal loading the 
tensile response has a higher strength than the compressive response, see 
Figure 4-18 and Figure 4-24.  This is due to the higher tensile than 
compressive strength of carbon and S2 glass fibres in the input property 
data.  It is important to consider how individual fibre properties are 
obtained.  The testing of individual fibres can be problematic as they are 
very small, in the range of m, making them difficult to handle.  
Micromechanics relations are often applied to tests on unidirectional 
laminae to extract individual fibre properties.  These indirect methods are 
obviously not ideal but in some cases it is the only viable option in 
obtaining individual fibre properties [79]. 
- 86 - 
General Observations 
For S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cells in all loading 
conditions at all strain rates initial failure occurs in an element where the 
maximum stress criterion reaches unity.  For longitudinal loading this 
occurs in the fibres, for longitudinal XZ shear this occurs in the interfaces 
and for all other loading conditions this occurs in the matrix.  The specific 
location of the failure within these constituents is in the highly stressed 
regions.  These regions can be clearly identified by viewing the von Mises 
stress contour plots in Figure 4-20 for carbon/epoxy and Figure 4-26 for S2 
glass/epoxy.  In transverse X tension and compression the highest stress 
in the matrix is seen horizontally between the fibres.  In transverse Y 
tension and compression the highest stress in the matrix is seen diagonally 
between the fibres.  In longitudinal tension and compression the highest 
stress is equally spread over all fibres.  In transverse XY shear the highest 
stress in the matrix is seen as a stress path horizontally across the width of 
the unit cell that curves between the fibres.  In longitudinal XZ shear the 
highest stress in the interface is in the regions where the fibres are 
horizontally at their closest point.  All these highest stressed regions 
correspond to the initial failure locations seen in the damage contour plots 
in Figure 4-21 for carbon/epoxy and Figure 4-27 for S2 glass/epoxy. 
4.5.2 Strain Rate Dependent Response 
For S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cells the elastic and 
damage phases are both clearly strain rate sensitive and the increase in 
stiffness and strength with increasing strain rate can be seen under all 
loading conditions except longitudinal tension and compression, Figure 
4-18 for carbon/epoxy and Figure 4-24 for S2 glass/epoxy.  In longitudinal 
tension and compression the mode of failure is fibre dominated.  The fibre 
material model has no strain rate dependence, shown in section 3.4.2, and 
hence the strain rate has little effect on the stress strain response in these 
loading modes.  However, in longitudinal tension for both S2 glass/epoxy 
and carbon/epoxy a small increase in the strength with increasing strength 
is noticeable.  This effect is due to the matrix and interface constituents 
strain rate dependence which has a small effect on the stress strain 
response of a fibre dominated loading mode.  The quantification of this 
strain rate dependence, for both stiffness and strength, is discussed in 
section 4.6, where numerical constants describing micro scale strain rate 
- 87 - 
dependence are determined for passing micro scale behaviour to the meso 
scale. 
4.5.3 Carbon and S2 Glass Comparison 
In sections 4.5 and 4.5.2 general trends were pointed out that were 
applicable to both testing of carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy micro scale 
unit cells.  There are obviously differences in the results due to the 
different input properties for the carbon and S2 glass fibres which will be 
discussed in this section.  The difference in the stress strain responses can 
be seen in Figure 4-29. 
- 88 - 
Figure 4-29.  Comparison of carbon/epoxy (1/s-light grey, 1000/s-black, 10000/s-
dark grey) and S2 glass/epoxy (1/s-green, 1000/s-red, 10000/s-blue) stress strain 
curves for all loading conditions. 
- 89 - 
Unit Cell Stiffness Properties 
The Rule of Mixtures (ROM) was used to calculate longitudinal stiffness, 
transverse stiffness, longitudinal shear stiffness (XZ) and transverse shear 
stiffness (XY).  These values were calculated using carbon material 
properties at the volume fraction of 66.28% and S2 glass material 
properties at the volume fraction of 54.32%.  The results, shown in Figure 
4-33 and Figure 4-34, suggest that the transverse stiffness and both shear 
stiffnesss should be slightly larger for carbon/epoxy than S2 glass/epoxy 
and the longitudinal stiffness should be significantly larger for 
carbon/epoxy than S2 glass/epoxy.  This is the case in the modelling 
results for longitudinal tension, longitudinal compression and longitudinal 
XZ shear at all rates of strain tested, see Figure 4-29 and Figure 4-30.  For 
all other loading conditions (transverse (X and Y) tension and compression 
and transverse XY shear) this is only true for the modelling results at a 
strain rate of 1 /s, see Figure 4-29 and Figure 4-30.  For the two higher 
rates of strain (1000 /s and 10000 /s) the modelling results show that the 
S2 glass/epoxy unit cell is slightly stiffer than the carbon/epoxy unit cell, 
see Figure 4-29 and Figure 4-30.  The one anomaly in this trend is that in 
XY shear the stiffness values at 1/s are the same for both S2 glass/epoxy 
and carbon/epoxy unit cells. 
- 90 - 
Figure 4-30.  Table showing the values of unit cell stiffness from micro scale 
modelling results for both S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy in all loading modes 
and at all strain rates.  Highlighted sections show which is unit cell has a larger 
stiffness value, S2 glass/epoxy or carbon/epoxy 
The three loading conditions where carbon/epoxy unit cells are stiffer than 
S2 glass/epoxy unit cells at all strain rates (longitudinal tension, 
longitudinal compression and longitudinal XZ shear) all experience non 
matrix dominated failure i.e. longitudinal failure is fibre dominated and 
longitudinal shear failure is interface dominated.  All other loading 
conditions experience matrix dominated failure and it is these modelling 
results which show a change in stiffness trend from carbon/epoxy unit cells 
being stiffer at 1/s to S2 glass/epoxy unit cells being stiffer at 1000/s and 
10000/s.  The matrix is the largest strain rate sensitive constituent, the 
fibre constituent is strain rate insensitive and the interface constituent is 
strain rate sensitive but a very small portion of the unit cell.  It appears 
that the matrix is causing this effect of making S2 glass/epoxy unit cells 
stiffer than carbon/epoxy unit cells at high strain rates in transverse (X and 
- 91 - 
Y) tension and compression and transverse XY shear.  The fibre volume 
fraction in the carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy unit cell is 66.28% and 
54.32% respectively.  The S2 glass/epoxy unit cell has a larger ratio of 
matrix material than the carbon/epoxy unit cell; hence, there is a larger 
ratio of strain rate sensitive material.  When testing at high strain rates this 
larger ratio of strain rate sensitive material is assigned a larger stiffness 
value through the material model making the S2 glass/epoxy unit cell 
stiffer than the carbon/epoxy unit cell in transverse (X and Y) tension and 
compression and transverse XY shear.   
Using the ROM equations with transverse fibre stiffness and fibre volume 
fraction values of 15GPa and 0.6628 for carbon respectively and 86GPa and 
0.5432 for S2 glass respectively, one can calculate the transverse unit cell 
stiffness with matrix stiffness values varying from the quasi static value of 
1.423GPa.  Following this using the transverse unit cell stiffness values and 
Poissons ratio values of 0.2 and 0.23 for carbon and S2 glass respectively 
one can calculate, using ROM, the unit cell transverse shear stiffness.  The 
results, shown in Figure 4-31, further emphasise the previous point that 
when the matrix stiffness is strain rate scaled past a critical value, the S2 
glass unit cell becomes stiffer than the carbon unit cell in transverse and 
transverse shear loading.  Thus the ROM calculations agree with the strain 
rate dependence comparisons on condition appropriate resin properties are 
used for the particular rate of loading. 
Figure 4-31.  Unit cell transverse and transverse shear stiffness values at increasing 
matrix stiffness values using ROM equations.  
- 92 - 
Unit Cell Strength Properties 
The failure strengths for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy unit cells are 
similar for transverse, X and Y, tension and compression, see Figure 4-29 
and Figure 4-32, as this is matrix dominated failure and both unit cells 
have identical matrix properties.  The same reasoning exists for 
longitudinal XZ shear where failure strengths are similar, see Figure 4-29 
and Figure 4-32, as this is interface dominated failure and both unit cells 
have identical interface properties.  However, in longitudinal tension the 
carbon/epoxy unit cell has a higher strength than the S2 glass/epoxy unit 
cell, see Figure 4-29 and Figure 4-32.  This is because the longitudinal 
tensile strength of carbon fibre, 4900MPa, is greater than that of S2 glass 
fibre, 4590MPa.  In longitudinal compression the carbon/epoxy unit cell has 
a lower strength that the S2 glass/epoxy unit cell, see Figure 4-29 and 
Figure 4-32.  This is because the longitudinal compressive strength of S2 
glass fibre, 3100MPa, is greater than that of carbon fibre, 2500MPa.  In 
transverse XY shear the failure strength is greater in the carbon/epoxy unit 
cell than the S2 glass/epoxy unit cell, see Figure 4-29 and Figure 4-32. 
- 93 - 
Figure 4-32.  Table showing the values of unit cell strength from micro scale 
modelling results for both S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy in all loading modes 
and at all strain rates. 
4.5.4 Analytical Results Comparison 
The graphs in Figure 4-33 and Figure 4-34 compare the longitudinal, 
transverse, longitudinal shear and transverse shear quasi-static stiffnesss 
predicted from the micro scale modelling and an analytical method, namely 
the Rule of Mixtures, which is well documented in [9].  The longitudinal 
stiffness values compare extremely well with less than a 1% change 
between analytical and micro modelling results.  For transverse, 
longitudinal shear and transverse shear stiffness the micro modelling 
results are always larger than the analytical predictions.  The difference is 
small (around 10%) for S2 glass and carbon longitudinal shear and carbon 
transverse shear stiffness values but much larger (40 to 50%) for S2 glass 
and carbon transverse stiffness and S2 glass transverse shear stiffness 
values.  It is important to note here that the micro scale modelling results 
- 94 - 
are being compared to an analytical method that is based on certain 
simplifications. It has been stated in the literature, [9], that the Rule of 
Mixtures is a poor approximation of transverse stiffness.  This also leads to 
a poor approximation of the transverse shear stiffness as this value is 
calculated using the transverse stiffness.  It is these values, transverse 
stiffness and transverse shear stiffness, where analytical results do not 
compare well to micro scale modelling results.  The Rule of Mixtures gives 
a poor prediction of transverse stiffness due to the slab model 
approximation and equal stress assumption during transverse loading.  It is 
more accurate to take into account the actual distribution of stress and 
strain during transverse loading, as with the micro modelling work in this 
thesis, with fibre geometry rather than the slab geometry approximation. 
Figure 4-33.  Longitudinal quasi-static stiffness comparison between analytical and 
micro scale modelling results 
- 95 - 
Figure 4-34.  Transverse, longitudinal shear and transverse shear quasi-static 
stiffness comparison between analytical and micro scale modelling results 
4.6 Micro to Meso Scale 
All the micro scale modelling results for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy 
unit cells are homogenised into properties that are carried forward for use 
as meso scale S2 glass and carbon yarn properties respectively.  The 
following parameters are obtained from the stress strain curves: stiffness 
values, Poissons ratio values, strengths, strain softening parameters and 
strain rate scaling constants for stiffness and strength.  The stiffness, 
strength and Poissons ratio values are simple to obtain.  The strain 
softening parameters and strain rate scaling parameters require further 
analysis of the stress strain results. 
The strain softening parameter controls the rate of stiffness degradation 
after damage initiation.  The value is obtained through a curve fitting 
exercise where Equation 3-9, 3-10 and 3-11 are implemented in a 
spreadsheet with the appropriate stiffness and maximum stress criteria 
(calculated using stiffness, strain and strength).  The resulting data is 
plotted against the micro modelling results stress strain curve and the 
strain softening parameter is altered so that the shape of the post elastic 
stress strain curve is the same.  Twenty four strain softening parameters 
are obtained, for each material, from the twenty four stress strain curves 
(eight loading conditions tested at three strain rates).  There is a significant 
- 96 - 
variation in these strain softening parameters as they represent everything 
from the abrupt stiffness degradation, such as in longitudinal tensile 
loading, to the gradual stiffness degradation, such as in transverse tensile 
loading.  Values range from positive values less than one for gradual 
stiffness degradation to values of 100 for abrupt stiffness degradation. 
A strain rate scaling constant is obtained by plotting a parameter (stiffness 
or strength) in a particular loading condition against the natural log of the 
strain rate.  As each loading condition has been tested at three strain rates 
there will be three coordinates on the plot.  The gradient of a linear trend 
line through these three coordinates divided by the value of the parameter 
(stiffness or strength) at the intersection with the y axis gives the strain 
rate scaling constant for the parameter in that particular loading condition.  
As there are eight loading conditions there will be eight strain rate scaling 
constants for stiffness and eight for strength.  An example of one the plots 
described is shown in Figure 4-35 where the strain rate scaling constant 
would be the gradient of the trend line (0.40317) divided by the value of 
the parameter at the intersection with the y axis (5.19439) which equals 
0.0776.  The stiffness and strength against the natural log of strain rate 
plots for S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cells in all 
loading conditions can be found in Appendix C. 
Figure 4-35.  Stiffness against the natural log of strain rate for a carbon/epoxy 
micro scale unit cell subjected to transverse x tension. 
The micro scale modelling results in a vast amount of material parameters 
that have to be reduced into homogenised material properties of the meso 
scale yarns.  For example, the micro scale output properties produce eight 
strength strain rate scaling constants and the meso scale yarn input 
properties require one strength strain rate scaling constant.  Figure 4-36 
- 97 - 
details how each of the meso scale yarn input properties are obtained from 
the large amount of micro scale output properties.  
Figure 4-36.  Micro scale output properties / Meso scale yarn input properties for S2 
glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy with details of how the values were obtained 
For some meso scale yarn input properties the choice of which micro scale 
output properties to average does not have a significant effect on the 
resulting value as the values are similar e.g. the meso scale yarn input 
property for longitudinal stiffness is the average of the longitudinal tensile 
and longitudinal compressive stiffness values from micro scale modelling, 
which are very similar.  However, for some meso scale yarn input 
properties the choice of which micro scale output properties to average 
does have a significant effect on the resulting value as the values are not 
- 98 - 
similar.  This is the case for the meso scale yarn input property called the 
strength strain rate scaling constant.  This is an average of the strength 
strain rate scaling constant for all loading conditions from micro scale 
modelling i.e. eight values.  These eight values for carbon/epoxy are 
0.1802, 0.1898, 0.1690, 0.1763, -0.0045, 0.0005, 0.1842 and 0.1044 and 
for S2 glass/epoxy are 0.1867, 0.1902, 0.1827, 0.1848, 0.0126, 0.0013, 
0.1935 and 0.1593 for transverse x tension, transverse x compression, 
transverse y tension, transverse y compression, longitudinal z tension, 
longitudinal z compression, transverse xy shear and longitudinal xz shear 
respectively.  The values with the graphs they were obtained from are 
given in Appendix C.  The average of the eight values gives 0.1250 for 
carbon/epoxy and 0.1445 for S2 glass/epoxy.  These values are 
comparable to most values for the individual loading modes strain rate 
scaling constants, however, there is a significant difference between the 
longitudinal z tension and longitudinal z compression values and the 
average value.  This is an important point to consider and the effect it has 
on the meso scale modelling results is discussed later in 5.5.2. 
- 99 - 
5 Meso Scale Modelling 
5.1 Introduction 
This chapter involves the numerical simulation and prediction of high strain 
rate material properties of composite lamina.  The modelling takes place at 
the meso scale where fibre bundles / yarns are arranged in a desired 
architecture, e.g. 0/90 NCF, and embedded in a matrix material.  Finite 
element analysis of carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cells 
provides the high strain rate properties of carbon/epoxy and S2 
glass/epoxy composite lamina subsequently to be used in macro scale 
analyses.  The key feature of this analysis is that the majority of input 
material properties have been generated by the micro scale modelling in 
Chapter 4. 
The chapter first details some micrograph work to establish yarn 
geometries followed by some modelling studies that have been conducted 
to obtain certain modelling parameters and to gain confidence in the user 
defined material models.  Meso scale modelling results are then presented 
for both carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy unit cells; see section 3.2 for 
unit cell definitions.  The unit cells have been tested in in-plane tension, in-
plane compression, through-thickness tension, through-thickness 
compression, in-plane shear and through-thickness shear loading.  Each 
loading condition has been tested over a range of strain rates from 1 /s to 
10000 /s.    The analysis of the data is then presented including detailed 
assessment of the damage evolution and high strain rate material 
properties for use in macro scale modelling.  The chapter is concluded with 
a detailed discussion of the results. 
5.2 Meso Scale Micrograph Analysis 
5.2.1 Yarn Dimension Study 
This section presents the results of the meso scale micrograph analysis to 
determine yarn width and yarn height of carbon and S2 glass yarns 
described in section 3.2.2.  The length of the carbon and S2 glass yarns 
were found to be 3235m (standard deviation of 306m) and 3611m 
(standard deviation of 366m) respectively.  The height of the carbon and 
- 100 - 
S2 glass yarns were found to be 465m (standard deviation of 35m) and 
424m (standard deviation of 23m) respectively.  Examples of the optical 
micrographs used to make these measurements are shown in Figure 5-1.  
The shape of yarns can vary from elliptical to rectangular, as seen in Figure 
5-1.  This variability is investigated further in section 5.3.4. 
Figure 5-1.  Optical micrographs of laminate cross sections of S2 glass/epoxy 
laminate (left) and hybrid carbon S2 glass/epoxy laminate (right) 
5.3 Meso Scale Modelling Studies 
5.3.1 Mesh Sensitivity Study 
A mesh sensitivity study was conducted on a carbon/epoxy meso scale unit 
cell to establish the optimum mesh density giving accuracy of solution and 
convergence of results.  The unit cell was tested at three different mesh 
densities in in-plane tension at 1000/s, the rate being selected for speed of 
analysis.  The effect of mesh density on the stress strain response is 
presented in Figure 5-2 where it can be seen all responses were identical.  
To go to coarser meshes would introduce high aspect ratio elements in the 
small through thickness gaps; hence, the choice was made to run with the 
mesh with 28680 elements.  The unit cell meshed at this density is shown 
in Figure 5-2. 
- 101 - 
Figure 5-2.  Stress strain response of carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell with three 
different mesh densities subjected to in-plane tension at 1000 /s.  The unit cell is 
shown with a mesh containing 28680 elements. 
5.3.2 Mass Scaling Study 
Mass scaling involves adding nonphysical mass to the model in order to 
achieve a larger stable time step and, therefore, reduced simulation run 
times.  The technique should only be used when the addition of the 
nonphysical mass does not significantly affect the overall results.  A 
carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell was tested in in-plane tension with 
increasing density values from the original value.  Simulations were run 
where the original density value was multiplied by 1e3, 1e6 and 1e9.  This 
testing resulted in identical stress strain responses when density was 
multiplied by 1e3 and 1e6 but deviation from the original response with an 
oscillatory pattern occurred with a multiplier of 1e9.  An appropriate level 
of mass scaling, a multiplier of 1e6, was chosen to be used for the meso 
simulations at the lowest strain rate where long simulations run times were 
expected.  This speeded up the analyses significantly. 
- 102 - 
5.3.3 Strain Time Loading Study 
The loading of the meso scale unit cells at the highest strain rate results in 
oscillatory unstable stress strain responses.  The way in which unit cells are 
loaded in this study is by applying a direct strain to the unit cell in a 
defined time, where this time is varied to give the desired strain rate.  The 
strain is applied in such a way to give a constant strain rate test i.e. by 
increasing the strain from zero strain at zero time to maximum strain at 
maximum time.  This is shown in Figure 5-3 as the tabular amplitude and 
results in the unit cell begin subjected to an instantaneous strain rate 
which causes the oscillatory unstable stress strain responses.  It is possible 
that these oscillations are due to stress wave propagation that was not 
seen in micro modelling due to the smaller length scale.  The period of the 
oscillations could be due to the stress wave travelling through the unit cell 
and being reflected from unit cell boundaries.  Further investigation into 
stress wave propagation, which is outside the scope of this thesis, would be 
required to verify this hypothesis.  
Figure 5-3.  Strain vs Time plot showing tabular and smooth step loading amplitudes 
In an attempt to resolve this issue, all loading conditions were tested at the 
highest strain rate with the tabular amplitude and also using a smooth step 
amplitude as shown in Figure 5-3.  The smooth step amplitude allows a 
more gradual increase in the strain rate rather than a large instantaneous 
strain rate.  The results in through thickness compression, which gives a 
good representation of the results in other loading conditions, is shown in 
Figure 5-4.  The smooth step amplitude resolves the issue of an unstable 
response and does not appear to affect the stress strain response in a 
- 103 - 
significant way i.e. the general trend seen in the tabular stress strain 
response is very similar to the smooth step stress strain response if the 
oscillations were filtered out.  The smooth step loading was subsequently 
used in all high strain rate simulations. 
Figure 5-4.  Stress strain response of carbon meso scale unit cell subjected to 
through thickness compression at 10000/s with two different loading amplitudes 
5.3.4 Yarn Shape Sensitivity Study 
Elliptical and rounded brick yarns demonstrate the two extremes of yarn 
shapes.   
An elliptical yarn is defined by specifying three points; (1) a centre point, 
(2) an axis endpoint and (3) an arbitrary point whose distance from the 
first axis determines the length of the second axis.  This is demonstrated in 
Figure 5-5. 
- 104 - 
Figure 5-5.  Ellipse generation:  1-centre point, 2-axis endpoint and 3-arbitrary point 
whose distance from the first axis determines the length of the second axis. 4-
Rounded brick generation 
A rounded brick yarn is defined by applying full rounds to each end of a 
rectangle as seen in Figure 5-5.  In other words each corner of the 
rectangle has a filleted radius equal to half the height of the rectangle. 
A NCF S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell was tested in in-plane tension, 
in-plane compression, through-thickness tension, through-thickness 
compression, in-plane shear and through-thickness shear.  The unit cell 
was tested at a strain rate of 1000/s for speed of analysis.  This test 
procedure was performed twice, once with elliptical shaped yarns and once 
with rounded brick shape yarns.  The dimensions of the elliptical shaped 
yarns were measured from micrographs i.e. yarn height and yarn width.  
The rounded brick shape yarn dimensions were adjusted to give the same 
volume fraction of yarns in the meso scale unit cell as for the elliptical yarn 
model. 
An almost identical stress strain response for elliptical and rounded brick 
yarn models was obtained for all loading conditions.  The only difference 
was in the through thickness tension where the post elastic response 
differed with the elliptical yarn model having a more ductile, less 
aggressive degradation of stiffness, response than the rounded brick yarn 
model, see Figure 5-6. 
- 105 - 
Figure 5-6. S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell in through thickness tension at 1000 
/s with elliptical and rounded brick yarn shapes. 
Kari et al [80] investigated the effect of yarn cross sectional shape on the 
mechanical properties of 3D woven carbon/epoxy composites through finite 
element analysis.  Five different weft yarn cross sections were considered 
ranging from sharp edged ellipses to rectangles to rectangles with semi-
circular ends.  The cross sections of the warp and binder yarns were the 
same in all five models by having a rectangular cross sectional shape.  The 
maximum stress criterion was used for the initiation of stiffness 
degradation.  All models were subjected to quasi static tensile loads in 
different directions to obtain key material properties.  It was found that 
there was very little change in stiffness with different yarn cross sectional 
shapes as all yarns still had the same volume fraction which is the 
dominant factor in determining stiffness.  There was a maximum change in 
strength of 2%, 15% and 30% in the weft, through-thickness and warp 
directions.  The lowest strengths were often seen with sharp edged 
elliptical yarn cross sections which generated stress concentrations.  The 
highest strengths were seen with rectangular or rectangular with semi-
circular ends yarn cross sections as stress concentrations were reduced.  
The results of this investigation in terms of the effect of yarn cross 
sectional shape on stiffness compares well to the results in this thesis, 
however, there is some discrepancy between the effect of yarn cross 
sectional shape on strength.  The results in this thesis show no change in 
- 106 - 
strength with change in yarn cross sectional shape and in the work by Kari 
et al [80] a maximum 2%, 15% and 30% change in strength is seen in the 
weft, through-thickness a warp directions respectively.  This discrepancy 
could be due to the different models being tested, NCF compared to 3D 
woven composite materials. 
Rounded brick yarn shapes will be used for all simulations, carbon/epoxy 
and S2 glass/epoxy.  They are representative of the geometry seen in 
micrographs obtained and the choice of shape does not appear to affect the 
results as seen in the study conducted in this section.  Rounded brick 
shaped yarns will also allow a higher maximum volume fraction of yarns 
within the meso scale unit cell. 
5.3.5 In-Plane Loading Study 
A NCF S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell was tested in both in-plane 
tension directions, x and z.  This study was conducted to ascertain if 
simulations needed to be conducted in both in-plane directions; in a similar 
fashion to the transverse loading study at the micro scale where results in 
the transverse x direction differed from the results in the transverse y 
direction, see section 4.3.7.   The meso scale unit cell was tested at a 
strain rate of 1000/s for speed of analysis.  The results, in terms of the 
stress strain response, were identical; hence, in-plane meso scale 
simulations in the proceeding results section were conducted in the x 
direction only. 
- 107 - 
5.4 Meso Scale Modelling Results 
This section presents the results of the carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy 
meso scale modelling.  The unit cells for both materials have been tested in 
multiple loading conditions, as shown in Figure 5-7, and at multiple strain 
rates (1, 1000 and 10000 /s). 
Figure 5-7. Meso scale unit cell loading conditions.  (a) in-plane x tension, (b) in-
plane x compression, (c) in-plane xz shear, (d) through thickness y tension, (e) 
through thickness y compression and (f) through thickness xy shear.  The example 
unit cells are S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cells with deformation scale factors 
applied. 
5.4.1 Carbon/Epoxy 
The stress strain responses for the carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell are 
presented in Figure 5-8 for in-plane loading (x direction), Figure 5-9 for 
through thickness loading (y direction) and Figure 5-10 for shear loading.  
For each loading condition the von Mises stress contour plots are shown in 
Figure 5-11.  Damage variable contour plots are shown in Figure 5-13, 
Figure 5-14, Figure 5-15, Figure 5-16, Figure 5-17 and Figure 5-18 for in-
plane tension, in-plane compression, through thickness tension, through 
thickness compression, through thickness shear and in-plane shear 
respectively.  A description of how the damage variable contour plots are 
displayed is given in Figure 5-12.  These results are discussed in detail in 
sections 5.5 and 5.5.2. 
- 108 - 
Figure 5-8.  Stress strain curves for carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell in in-plane 
tension and in-plane compression at strain rates of 1 (green), 1000 (red) and 10000 
(blue) /s 
Figure 5-9.  Stress strain curves for carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell in through 
thickness tension and through thickness compression at strain rates of 1 (green), 
1000 (red) and 10000 (blue) /s 
- 109 - 
Figure 5-10.  Stress strain curves for carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell in through 
thickness XY shear and in-plane XZ shear at strain rates of 1 (green), 1000 (red) 
and 10000 (blue) /s 
Figure 5-11.  Carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell von Mises stress contours before 
damage has initiated (reflecting the stress distributions throughout the elastic 
region) at 1/s in (a) in-plane x tension, (b) in-plane x compression, (c) in-plane xz 
shear, (d) through thickness y tension, (e) through thickness y compression and (f) 
through thickness xy shear. Red indicates high stress and blue indicates low stress. 
- 110 - 
Figure 5-12.  Diagram of how the damage variable contour plots are displayed in 
Figure 5-13 to Figure 5-18 for carbon/epoxy and Figure 5-23 to Figure 5-28 for S2 
glass/epoxy.  (a) full sized meso scale unit cell, (b) meso scale unit cell cut in half 
on the Z Plane, (c) as (b) but with yarn constituent removed, (d) as (b) but with 
matrix constituent removed.  (c) and (d) are shown in the damage contour plots at 
different stages of damage (initial, intermediate and final) and at different strain 
rates (1/s, 1000/s and 10000/s).  Initial / intermediate / final damage at 1/s is not 
necessarily at the same value of strain as 1000/s and 10000/s.  The images are 
shown at values of strain that are representative of the stages of damage. 
- 111 - 
Figure 5-13.  Carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) which 
indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in in-plane tension at 1/s (left), 1000/s (centre) and 10000/s (right).  Each loading condition has three 
stages of damage shown; initial (top), intermediate (middle) and final (bottom).  The matrix and yarn regions of the unit cell are shown separately and 
have been cut in half along the z plane to show internal damage. 
- 112 - 
Figure 5-14.  Carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) which 
indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in in-plane compression at 1/s (left), 1000/s (centre) and 10000/s (right).  Each loading condition has 
three stages of damage shown; initial (top), intermediate (middle) and final (bottom).  The matrix and yarn regions of the unit cell are shown separately 
and have been cut in half along the z plane to show internal damage. 
- 113 - 
Figure 5-15.  Carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) which 
indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in through thickness tension at 1/s (left), 1000/s (centre) and 10000/s (right).  Each loading condition 
has three stages of damage shown; initial (top), intermediate (middle) and final (bottom).  The matrix and yarn regions of the unit cell are shown 
separately and have been cut in half along the z plane to show internal damage. 
- 114 - 
Figure 5-16.  Carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) which 
indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in through thickness compression at 1/s (left), 1000/s (centre) and 10000/s (right).  Each loading 
condition has three stages of damage shown; initial (top), intermediate (middle) and final (bottom).  The matrix and yarn regions of the unit cell are 
shown separately and have been cut in half along the z plane to show internal damage. 
- 115 - 
Figure 5-17.  Carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) which 
indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in through thickness shear at 1/s (left), 1000/s (centre) and 10000/s (right).  Each loading condition 
has three stages of damage shown; initial (top), intermediate (middle) and final (bottom).  The matrix and yarn regions of the unit cell are shown 
separately and have been cut in half along the z plane to show internal damage. 
- 116 - 
Figure 5-18.  Carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) which 
indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in in-plane shear at 1/s (left), 1000/s (centre) and 10000/s (right).  Each loading condition has three 
stages of damage shown; initial (top), intermediate (middle) and final (bottom).  The matrix and yarn regions of the unit cell are shown separately and 
have been cut in half along the z plane to show internal damage
- 117 - 
5.4.2 S2 Glass/Epoxy 
The stress strain responses for the S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell are 
presented in Figure 5-19 for in-plane loading (x direction), Figure 5-20 for 
through thickness loading (y direction) and Figure 5-21 for shear loading.  
For each loading condition the von Mises stress contour plots are shown in 
Figure 5-22.  Damage variables contour plots are shown in Figure 5-23, 
Figure 5-24, Figure 5-25, Figure 5-26, Figure 5-27 and Figure 5-28 for in-
plane tension, in-plane compression, through thickness tension, through 
thickness compression, through thickness shear and in-plane shear 
respectively.  A description of how the damage variable contour plots are 
displayed is given in Figure 5-12.  These results are discussed in detail in 
sections 5.5 and 5.5.2. 
Figure 5-19.  Stress strain curves for S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell in in-plane 
tension and in-plane compression at strain rates of 1 (green), 1000 (red) and 10000 
(blue) /s 
- 118 - 
Figure 5-20.  Stress strain curves for S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell in through 
thickness tension and through thickness compression at strain rates of 1 (green), 
1000 (red) and 10000 (blue) /s  
Figure 5-21.  Stress strain curves for S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell in through 
thickness XY shear and in-plane XZ shear at strain rates of 1 (green), 1000 (red) 
and 10000 (blue) /s 
- 119 - 
Figure 5-22.  S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell von Mises stress contours before 
damage has initiated (reflecting the stress distributions throughout the elastic 
region) at 1/s in (a) in-plane x tension, (b) in-plane x compression, (c) in-plane xz 
shear, (d) through thickness y tension, (e) through thickness y compression and (f) 
through thickness xy shear.  Red indicates high stress and blue indicates low stress. 
- 120 - 
Figure 5-23.  S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) 
which indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in in-plane tension at 1/s (left), 1000/s (centre) and 10000/s (right).  Each loading condition has 
three stages of damage shown; initial (top), intermediate (middle) and final (bottom).  The matrix and yarn regions of the unit cell are shown separately 
and have been cut in half along the z plane to show internal damage. 
- 121 - 
Figure 5-24.  S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) 
which indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in in-plane compression at 1/s (left), 1000/s (centre) and 10000/s (right).  Each loading 
condition has three stages of damage shown; initial (top), intermediate (middle) and final (bottom).  The matrix and yarn regions of the unit cell are 
shown separately and have been cut in half along the z plane to show internal damage. 
- 122 - 
Figure 5-25.  S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) 
which indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in through thickness tension at 1/s (left), 1000/s (centre) and 10000/s (right).  Each loading 
condition has three stages of damage shown; initial (top), intermediate (middle) and final (bottom).  The matrix and yarn regions of the unit cell are 
shown separately and have been cut in half along the z plane to show internal damage. 
- 123 - 
Figure 5-26.  S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) 
which indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in through thickness compression at 1/s (left), 1000/s (centre) and 10000/s (right).  Each 
loading condition has three stages of damage shown; initial (top), intermediate (middle) and final (bottom).  The matrix and yarn regions of the unit cell 
are shown separately and have been cut in half along the z plane to show internal damage. 
- 124 - 
Figure 5-27.  S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) 
which indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in through thickness shear at 1/s (left), 1000/s (centre) and 10000/s (right).  Each loading 
condition has three stages of damage shown; initial (top), intermediate (middle) and final (bottom).  The matrix and yarn regions of the unit cell are 
shown separately and have been cut in half along the z plane to show internal damage. 
- 125 - 
Figure 5-28.  S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell damage variable contours.  Damage varies from zero (blue) which indicates no damage to one (red) 
which indicates maximum damage. Unit cells are shown in in-plane shear at 1/s (left), 1000/s (centre) and 10000/s (right).  Each loading condition has 
three stages of damage shown; initial (top), intermediate (middle) and final (bottom).  The matrix and yarn regions of the unit cell are shown separately 
and have been cut in half along the z plane to show internal damage. 
- 126 - 
5.5 Meso Scale Modelling Discussion 
5.5.1 Elastic and Damage Response 
For both S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cells in all 
loading conditions at all strain rates the stress strain response initially 
shows linear elastic behaviour. 
For both S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cells in in-plane 
X tension, in-plane X compression, through thickness Y compression, in-
plane XZ shear and through thickness XY shear (for S2 glass/epoxy only) 
the stress strain responses at all strain rates shows elastic behaviour 
followed by an abrupt, instant / almost instant reduction in stiffness i.e. 
brittle failure as shown schematically in Figure 4-28 (c).  The stress strain 
responses are shown in Figure 5-8, Figure 5-9 and Figure 5-10 for 
carbon/epoxy and Figure 5-19, Figure 5-20 and Figure 5-21 for S2 
glass/epoxy. 
In-Plane Tension and Compression 
For both S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cells in in-plane 
tension and compression the abrupt reduction in stiffness occurs due to 
failure of the yarns parallel to the loading direction, seen clearly in the 
damage contour plots in Figure 5-13 and Figure 5-14 for carbon/epoxy and 
Figure 5-23 and Figure 5-24 for S2 glass/epoxy.  If one considers what is 
happening to the yarns parallel to the loading direction at the micro scale it 
is apparent that the micro unit cell would be subjected to longitudinal 
tension (for meso scale in-plane tension) or longitudinal compression (for 
meso scale in-plane compression).  These micro scale loading conditions 
result in a strain softening parameter of 100, Figure 4-36, as the strain 
softening parameter for a particular yarn element is selected based on the 
largest maximum stress criterion, explained in 3.4.4.  This causes the 
abrupt failure seen in both S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy meso scale 
unit cells in in-plane tension and compression.   
Damage also occurs in the yarns transverse to the loading direction.  This 
damage does not appear to affect the integrity of the unit cell as the stress 
strain response is still dominated by the failure of the yarns parallel to the 
loading direction.  It is well understood that loading of a cross-ply laminate 
parallel to one of the fibre directions results in through thickness cracking 
- 127 - 
of transverse plies even when the overall final failure is dominated by 
transverse to the fibre direction cracking of axial plies, see Figure 2-6.  It 
can also be seen in the damage contour plots that the matrix is damaging 
without affecting the overall stress strain response, a process that happens 
in reality known as micro matrix cracking.  The damage in the matrix and 
yarns transverse to the loading direction becomes more prominent after 
the yarns parallel to the loading direction have failed, as this is where the 
remaining load is transferred. 
Figure 5-29.  Carbon/epoxy NCF cross-ply laminate [0/90/0/90]S subjected to in-
plane tension to (a) 0.66% and (b) 0.87%.  Image (c) shows a magnified image of 
the blue box in image (b). Reproduced from [11]. 
Mattsson et al [11] took micrographs of a carbon/epoxy NCF cross-ply 
laminate [0/90/0/90]S after in-plane tensile loading to different levels of 
strain (0.66% and 0.87%).  At 0.66% strain, see Figure 5-29 (a), some 
90 yarns (those transverse to the loading direction) had developed cracks 
across their width.  These cracks were more frequently located in the 
- 128 - 
middle 90 layer which had double thickness where the crack propagated 
across both 90 layers and sometimes into a 0 layer.  At 0.87% strain, 
see Figure 5-29 (b) and (c), extensive damage is seen in the form of 
multiple traverse cracks in the 90 layers, delaminations between 0 and 
90 layers and fracture of the 0 bundles.  The researchers stress how it is 
difficult to detail the actual sequence of events.  The in-plane tension 
damage contour plots for S2 glass/epoxy in Figure 5-23 shows the 
behaviour described above with the 90 yarn damage occurring across the 
middle 90 layer with double thickness before the damage propagates 
across the through thickness matrix regions and into the 0 layer causing 
extensive damage in the form of a high level of 90 yarn damage, 
delaminations (extensive through thickness matrix damage) and fracture of 
the 0 yarns. 
Hosur et al[25] tested 32 ply cross-ply carbon/epoxy laminates in in-plane 
compression at 82, 163 and 817 /s rates of strain on a split Hopkinson bar.  
The in-plane compression samples failed with the laminate splitting into 
several sub-laminates.  At higher strain rates the samples tended to split 
into less sub-laminates.  It is hard to compare these results to the 
modelling results in this thesis, as the detailed mechanisms of failure were 
not the key focus of the research paper. However, the description of 
splitting failure for in-plane compression implies a large amount of 
widespread damage which is seen in the damage contour plots in Figure 
5-14 and Figure 5-24 for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy results 
respectively.  
Through Thickness Compression 
For both S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cells in through 
thickness compression the abrupt reduction in stiffness occurs due to 
failure of all yarns seen in the damage contour plots in Figure 5-16 for 
carbon/epoxy and Figure 5-26 for S2 glass/epoxy.  If one considers what is 
happening to the yarns at the micro scale it is apparent that the micro unit 
cell would be subjected to transverse compression resulting in a transverse 
compressive strain softening parameter of 1.667, seen in Figure 4-36.  This 
causes the abrupt failure, however, this value of 1.667 is much less than 
the value of 100 discussed previously which also gave abrupt failure.  This 
lower value of strain softening parameter should produce a less abrupt 
failure resulting in a more gradual reduction in stiffness.  This is seen in the 
through thickness compression stress strain curves at the higher rates of 
- 129 - 
strain with a gradual curve reduction in stiffness followed by abrupt failure.  
The abrupt failure at the lower strain rate tests is attributed to the 
complexity of loading conditions that are occurring within the yarns during 
the simulations.  This results in certain elements being attributed a strain 
softening parameter, from micro modelling results, that is not the 
transverse compressive strain softening parameter of 1.667; it can be a 
shear strain softening parameter which generates a more abrupt reduction 
in stiffness. 
Hosur et al[25] tested 32 ply cross-ply carbon/epoxy laminates in through 
thickness compression at 82, 163 and 817 /s rates of strain on a split 
Hopkinson bar.  The through thickness compression samples did not fail at 
82/s, failed through splitting and crushing at 163/s and failed through 
crushing and shear fracture at 817/s.  It is hard to compare these results 
to the modelling results in this thesis, as the detailed mechanisms of failure 
were not the key focus of the research paper.  However, the description 
crushing failure for through-thickness compression implies a large amount 
of widespread damage which is seen in the damage contour plots in Figure 
5-16 and Figure 5-26 for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy results 
respectively. 
In-Plane Shear 
For both S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cells in in-plane 
shear the abrupt reduction in stiffness occurs due to damage in elements in 
the yarn to such an extent that at maximum damage they are deleted from 
the analysis.  During this damage process there is also a significant amount 
of damage occurring in the matrix.  The damage contour plots for 
carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy are shown in Figure 5-18 and Figure 
5-28 respectively. 
Through Thickness Shear 
For the carbon/epoxy, not S2 glass/epoxy, meso scale unit cell in through 
thickness XY shear the stress strain response at all strain rates shows 
elastic behaviour followed by a section of gradual decreasing gradient 
similar to the shape shown schematically in Figure 4-28 (a) i.e. ductile.  
The stress strain responses are shown in Figure 5-10.  The reason for this 
type of damage occurring in just the carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cell and 
not the S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell is that there are larger gaps of 
matrix material between the yarns in the carbon/epoxy meso scale unit 
- 130 - 
cell.  This leads to matrix dominated through thickness shear failure in the 
carbon/epoxy unit cell, shown in Figure 5-17.  The matrix has a strain 
softening parameter of 0.1 for tension, compression and shear; which gives 
a stress strain response exhibiting a gradual reduction in stiffness.  For the 
S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell, damage is not matrix dominated, it 
occurs in both the matrix and the yarns, shown in the damage contour 
plots in Figure 5-27.  The yarns have multiple strain softening parameters 
for different loading conditions.  These yarn strain softening parameters 
are derived from the micro scale modelling work and are given in Figure 
4-36 and range from 0.1 to 100.  The yarn strain softening parameters of 
interest in meso scale through thickness shear loading is the micro scale 
longitudinal shear strain softening parameter, 100, for the yarns parallel to 
the loading direction and the micro scale transverse shear strain softening 
parameter, 0.6667, for the yarns transverse to the loading direction.  This 
is clearly seen in Figure 5-30.  The final failure in the S2 glass/epoxy meso 
scale unit cell subjected to through thickness shear is due to failure in the 
yarns parallel to the loading direction.  These are the yarns that are 
subjected to longitudinal shear at the micro scale which corresponds to a 
strain softening parameter of 100 giving abrupt failure. 
Figure 5-30.  (a) Meso scale unit cell loaded in through thickness shear, (b) Micro 
scale unit cell loaded in transverse shear and (c) Micro scale unit cell loaded 
longitudinal shear.  The yarns parallel to the meso scale loading direction are 
subjected to longitudinal shear at the micro scale, whereas, the yarns transverse to 
the meso scale loading direction are subjected to transverse shear at the micro 
scale. 
- 131 - 
Through Thickness Tension 
For S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cells in through 
thickness Y tension, the stress strain response at the strain rates of 1/s 
and 1000/s show elastic behaviour followed by an abrupt, instant reduction 
in stiffness as schematically shown in Figure 4-28 (c) i.e. brittle failure.  As 
the strain rate is increased to 10000/s the stress strain response changes 
and shows elastic behaviour followed by a section of gradual decreasing 
gradient with the shape shown schematically in Figure 4-28 (b) i.e. a more 
ductile failure.  The stress strain responses are shown in Figure 5-9 for 
carbon/epoxy and Figure 5-20 for S2 glass/epoxy.  The abrupt reduction in 
stiffness at 1/s and 1000/s occurs due to yarn failure, seen in Figure 5-15 
and Figure 5-25 for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy respectively.  The 
more gradual reduction in stiffness seen at 10000/s is seen due to the 
increased spread of low level damage throughout the entirety of the yarns, 
again seen in Figure 5-15 and Figure 5-25.  The results effectively show a 
change in the strain softening parameter (for through thickness tension, 
which will be used for macro input properties) with strain rate as this 
controls the amount of stiffness degradation in the post elastic region.  In 
through thickness tension one would expect to see a large amount of 
matrix damage in the through thickness spacing between yarns.  This type 
of damage leads to delamination followed by yarn failure.  In both the 
carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy damage contour plots there is limited 
damage in the matrix in the through thickness spacing between the yarns 
and this is not the cause of ultimate failure.  The reason why the model is 
not replicating this type of damage could be due to a number of reasons; 
the through thickness spacing (and in-plane spacing) are not measured 
values as they are adjusted proportionally to give the required volume 
fractions (see 3.2.2) and in reality the through thickness spacing would 
vary from yarn to yarn with the large spaces creating a greater chance of a 
delamination zone. 
General Observations 
For S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cells in all loading 
conditions at all strain rates initial failure occurs in an element where the 
maximum stress criterion reaches unity.  The specific location of the 
failure, yarn or matrix constituent, is in the highly stressed regions.  These 
regions can be clearly identified by viewing the von Mises stress contour 
plots in Figure 5-11 for carbon/epoxy and Figure 5-22 for S2 glass/epoxy. 
- 132 - 
5.5.2 Strain Rate Dependent Response 
For S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cells the elastic and 
damage phases are both clearly strain rate sensitive and the increase in 
stiffness and strength with increasing strain rate can be seen under all 
loading conditions except in-plane tension and compression.  In in-plane 
tension and compression, stress strain curves shown in Figure 5-8 for 
carbon/epoxy and Figure 5-19 for S2 glass/epoxy, there is little or no 
change in stiffness with increasing strain rate, however, there is an 
increase in strength observed with increasing strain rate. 
In the meso scale simulations there are multiple factors that affect the 
resulting strain rate dependence.  The matrix material model scales 
stiffness with the same values in tension, compression and shear.  The 
yarn material model scales stiffness with three different strain rate scaling 
constants; one for longitudinal stiffness, one for transverse stiffness and 
one for shear stiffness.  The latter three parameters are derived from the 
micro scale modelling and result in the values in Figure 4-36.  The value for 
the longitudinal stiffness strain rate scaling constant is much lower 
(practically zero) than the transverse and shear stiffness strain rate scaling 
constants.  In in-plane tension and compression testing the longitudinal 
stiffness of the yarn plays a large role in determining the overall stiffness 
of the meso scale unit cell, as the yarn transverse stiffness (for 
carbon/epoxy) and matrix stiffness are small in comparison.  The 
longitudinal stiffness of the yarn will have been strain rate scaled by an 
insignificant amount at all strain rates resulting in little or no change in 
stiffness of the carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell in in-
plane tension and compression. 
It can, however, be seen that the strength in in-plane tension and 
compression testing does change significantly with increasing strain rate in 
both carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cells.  For the yarn 
material model there is only one strain rate scaling constant for strength 
which is the average of all strength strain rate scaling constants at the 
micro scale from all loading conditions.  Therefore, even though in Figure 
4-18 and Figure 4-24 there is no change in strength with increasing strain 
rate in micro scale longitudinal tension and compression, the longitudinal 
tensile/compressive strength value of the yarn is scaled in the same 
manner as all other yarn strength parameters.  The result is a large change 
- 133 - 
in strength with increasing strain rate for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy 
meso scale unit cells in in-plane tension and compression.  It is also 
important to consider that the transverse yarns and matrix material will 
have some effect on the material response and, hence, how much the 
strength changes in in-plane tension and compression with increasing 
strain rate.  Only one value was used for the yarn strength strain rate 
scaling constant at the meso scale for simplification and also to have 
consistency with the MAT162 material model in LS-DYNA, where resulting 
data is transferred for macro scale analyses (see section 5.6). 
In the S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cell in in-plane compression there is 
little change in the response between 1/s and 1000/s.  This is due to a 
change in the damage modes.  With increasing strain rate there appears to 
be an increasing amount of damage in the yarns transverse to the loading 
direction before the failure of the yarns parallel to the loading direction.  
This can be seen in the damage contour plots in Figure 5-24. 
5.6 Meso to Macro Scale 
All the meso scale modelling results for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy 
unit cells are homogenised into properties that are carried forward for use 
as macro scale S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy lamina properties 
respectively.  The following parameters are obtained from the stress strain 
curves: stiffness values, Poissons ratio values, strengths, strain softening 
parameters and strain rate scaling constants for stiffness and strength.  
The material properties used in the macro scale modelling studies are not 
given in this thesis for confidentiality reasons; however, the values are 
obtained in the same manner as described in Section 4.6.   
The stiffness and strength against the natural log of strain rate plots for S2 
glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy meso scale unit cells in all loading 
conditions can be found in Appendix D. 
5.7 Macro Scale Modelling Case Studies 
The macro scale modelling work, which utilises the multi-scale modelling 
results in this thesis, was conducted by two industrial partners involved in 
the project.  BAE Systems conducted blast impact modelling and QinetiQ 
conducted ballistic impact modelling.  This section presents two case 
- 134 - 
studies of the macro scale modelling work edited from a joint publication 
with The University of Nottingham, BAE Systems and QinetiQ [32]. 
5.7.1 Blast Panel Case Study 
Simulation of a preliminary armour design concept has been undertaken to 
assess the response to blast load and to compare results with tests 
undertaken in the early phases of the LiMBS project. 
The configuration of the test is shown in Figure 5-31. The 800mm x 
800mm test panel is clamped by through-bolts to a rigid steel framework. 
Blast loading is applied to the upper surface from a 2 kg pancake charge of 
PE4, offset from the upper surface by 150mm. The panel is comprised of 
two materials; a toughened steel front face (Armox 340) and an S2 
glass/carbon composite laminate behind. The two layers of material are 
held together by the clamping force imposed by the rig. 
Figure 5-31.  Blast panel experimental test setup 
Numerical simulations were performed using LS-DYNA. The extent of the 
finite element model is shown in Figure 5-32 (quarter symmetry 
employed).  The use of a quarter symmetry model is a simplification that 
needs to be carefully considered, especially if 45 layers are being 
explicitly modelled.  Single point integration hexahedral elements were 
employed throughout the model, each ply of the carbon/S2-glass laminate 
being represented as a single layer of elements. MAT_COMPOSITE_MSC 
(MAT162) was used to describe the rate dependent behaviour of the carbon 
and S2 glass materials. These material models were populated with data 
supplied from micro/meso-scale modelling. Tiebreak interfaces were 
defined between the adjacent laminate layers with failure parameters 
- 135 - 
specified to represent delamination.  The panel was loaded directly with 
pressure histories derived from a preliminary 2-D axisymmetric Euler 
analysis of the detonation of the 2kg pancake charge. 
Figure 5-32.  Model setup with detail of blast panel cross section 
The level of predicted damage to the panel is shown in Figure 5-33, 
alongside the post-experimental test panel.  Post-test damage in the 
laminate is characterized by significant intra-lamina failure and gross 
delamination, with bulging deformation, but no penetration, of the steel 
front face. The model predicts a similar pattern of failure in the composite, 
combining fibre and matrix in-plane failure with delamination across the 
majority of the panel.  The model also shows good agreement with data 
from timing pins positioned behind the test panel (recording the time at 
specific levels of panel displacement). In addition, the overall deformation 
level of the front steel face is closely aligned to the deformation measured 
in test.   
Figure 5-33.  Blast panel damage. Model (left) and experimental test (right) 
The overall results provide confidence in the modelling approach and 
material data employed to simulate this blast event. The techniques 
- 136 - 
established have provided the means to move forward with the assessment 
of alternative blast configurations to support the development of 
lightweight, multi-material armour concepts. 
5.7.2 Ballistic Panel Case Study 
Building upon work undertaken in support of the Europa CAFV (Carbon 
Fibre for Armoured Fighting Vehicles) project [81], QinetiQ are currently 
investigating the use of multi-scale modelling as a means of predicting the 
ballistic and spall liner performance of structural composites.  The 
resistance of 24mm thick hybrid S2 glass / Carbon laminates to perforation 
by 12.7mm fragment simulating projectiles (FSP) was initially assessed 
experimentally to determine the V50 ballistic limit, which defines the impact 
speed at which 50% of projectiles would be expected to perforate the 
target.  For the baseline 24mm thick S2 glass / carbon hybrid considered 
under the LiMBS project, a ballistic limit velocity of 646m/s was obtained. 
Numerical modelling of the fragment impact tests was undertaken in LS-
DYNA using MAT_COMPOSITE_SOLID_FAILURE (MAT59) to represent the 
hybrid composite target.  Using the micro/meso-scale modelling data, the 
24mm thick quasi-isotropic laminate was divided into 28 layers of 
elements, with each layer representing two plies of the physical laminate 
and with fibres running in the 0 and 90 or +45 and -45 directions.  Given 
the strain rate dependent nature of the material properties derived from 
the micro and meso scale models, and in the absence of strain rate 
dependency within MAT59, initial simulations have used quasi-static 
material property data to represent the glass and carbon reinforced layers 
of the hybrid composite laminate. 
The 12.7mm FSP was represented as a right circular AISI 4340 steel 
cylinder using MAT_JOHNSON_COOK (MAT15) and EOS_GRUNIESEN.  
Contact between the projectile and target was achieved using an eroding 
contact algorithm, with erosion added to the composite material model to 
delete severely distorted elements from the simulation. 
The ballistic impact model was run for a series of increasing impact 
velocities to determine the predicted performance limit of the hybrid 
composite target. Figure 5-34 illustrates the model for a fragment impact 
- 137 - 
velocity of 600 m/s, while the projectiles velocity history is shown in Figure 
5-35.  
Figure 5-34.  Ballistic impact model representing impact of 12.7mm FSP on 24mm 
thick hybrid glass/carbon target at 600m/s 
Figure 5-35.  Predicted velocity history for 12.7mm FSP impacting 24mm thick 
hybrid glass/carbon target at 600m/s 
The results obtained from the initial ballistic impact models indicate that, 
using quasi-static material property data, the model under-predicts the 
resistance of the hybrid composite target to fragment perforation.  To a 
large extent, this is to be expected, with both the S2 glass and carbon 
meso-scale models reporting an appreciable level of strain rate sensitivity. 
Future work under the LiMBS project will investigate the use of high strain 
rate property data as a means of improving the predictive capability of the 
ballistic impact model, the effect of through thickness reinforcement on the 
- 138 - 
development of damage within the target, and the ability of numerical 
modelling to predict the spall liner performance of structural composites in 
terms of the behind armour cone angle resulting from overmatching 
threats.  
- 139 - 
6 Experimental Testing 
6.1 Introduction 
This chapter details the experimental testing conducted to validate the 
meso scale modelling in Chapter 5 and give confidence in the micro scale 
modelling in Chapter 4. 
S2 glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy NCF composite laminates were tested in 
in-plane tension (0/90 layup), in-plane compression (0/90 layup) and 
in-plane shear ( 45 layup) at quasi-static (all loading conditions) and 
intermediate rates of strain (compression only).  Quasi-static ( 1/s) and 
intermediate ( 100/s) strain rate testing was conducted on an 
electromechanical universal static test machine and an instrumented falling 
weight drop tower respectively. 
This chapter firstly details the experimental methodology, followed by the 
results in graphical and tabular format and finally a discussion of the 
results with a comparison to the modelling work is presented. 
6.2 Methodology 
6.2.1 Manufacturing Process 
All composite panels were manufactured by Permali Gloucester Limited 
[82] using a resin infusion method known as vacuum bagging.  The carbon 
fabric used was 1010 gsm / 0 90 / 34 700 24K / 1270 and the S2 glass 
fabric used was 1010 gsm / 0 90 / S2 463-AA-250 / 1270, both supplied 
by Sigmatex [83].  The epoxy resin used was SICOMIN SR1710 / SD7820, 
supplied by Matrix Composite Materials Company [84].  Two 600mm x 
600mm composite panels were manufactured, one 4 ply S2 glass/epoxy 
and one 4 ply carbon/epoxy.  All panels were symmetric about the mid-
plane and had a 0/90 layup sequences with 4 plies where a single ply 
comprises one 0 and one 90 layer.  The thickness was chosen to ensure 
buckling did not occur in in-plane compression testing at both quasi-static 
and intermediate strain rates. 
- 140 - 
Quasi-static and intermediate strain rate test specimens were cut from the 
panels using a band saw and circular blade cutting saw.  In-plane shear 
specimens were cut from the 0/90 panels at a 45 angle. 
6.2.2 Quasi-Static Testing 
The quasi-static testing procedures presented in this section are based on 
the work by Brown et al [6].  All quasi-static testing was conducted on an 
Instron 5581 (shear) and 5985 (tension and compression) 
electromechanical universal test machine with data (time, load, longitudinal 
and transverse extension and strain) being recorded using the Instron and 
an Imetrum non-contact video extensometer [85].  The extension and 
strain data was obtained by setting up a four point bi-axial virtual gauge in 
the Imetrum software package.  Quasi-static test specimen dimensions are 
shown in Figure 6-1.  The specimens were tested at a crosshead speed of 2 
mm/min, giving strain rates of 0.0002/s for tension and shear specimens 
and 0.001/s for compression specimens based on the gauge lengths in 
Figure 6-1. 
Figure 6-1.  Quasi-static (a) tension, (b) shear and (c) compression test specimen 
dimensions.  The dotted lines on the specimens indicate the gauge length.  The grids 
to the left of the specimen indicate 0/90 or  45 layup sequence. 
- 141 - 
In-Plane Tensile Testing 
Quasi-static tensile testing was performed according to the ASTM standard 
D3039 [86].  The quasi-static tensile specimens were straight sided 
specimens 25mm wide and 250mm in length (150mm gauge length).  All 
specimens consisted of 4 plies in a 0/90 layup sequence, giving a 
thickness of 4mm.  The electromechanical universal test machine was fitted 
with rotationally self-aligning wedge grips. 
In-Plane Shear Testing 
Quasi-static shear testing was performed according to the ASTM standard 
D3518 [87].  The quasi-static shear specimens were straight sided 
specimens 25mm wide and 250mm in length (150mm gauge length).  All 
specimens consisted of 4 plies in a  45 layup sequence, giving a 
thickness of 4mm.  The quasi-static shear testing was performed in the 
same manner as the quasi-static tensile testing.  The shear strain was 
calculated as the longitudinal strain minus the transverse strain and the 
shear stress was calculated as the longitudinal load divided by two times 
the area as detailed in the ASTM standard D3518 [87]. 
In-Plane Compression Testing 
The quasi-static compression specimens were straight sided specimens 
25mm wide and 40mm in length (30mm gauge length).  All specimens 
consisted of 4 plies in a 0/90 layup sequence, giving a thickness of 4mm.  
A compression fixture was installed in the electromechanical universal test 
machine that consisted of a T-shaped impactor that is guided by two 
vertical channels in a steel supporting block.  The specimen was clamped 
between two steel end caps and placed directly under the impactor.  Please 
consult the paper by Brown et al [6] for further information on the 
compression fixture. 
6.2.3 Intermediate Strain Rate Testing 
The intermediate strain rate testing procedures presented in this section 
are based on the work by Brown et al [6].  All intermediate strain rate 
testing was conducted on an instrumented falling weight drop tower test 
machine.  Intermediate strain rate test compression specimen dimensions 
are shown in Figure 6-1 (c), i.e. they are the same as quasi-static 
specimens. 
- 142 - 
In-Plane Compression Testing 
The intermediate strain rate compression specimens were straight sided 
specimens 25mm wide and 40mm in length (30mm gauge length).  All 
specimens consisted of 4 plies in a 0/90 layup sequence, giving a 
thickness of 4mm.  The compression fixture used for quasi static 
compression testing, described in 6.2.2, was installed in the instrumented 
falling weight drop tower where the impactor of the drop tower contacted 
the T-shaped impactor of the compression fixture.  Load was measured 
with a piezoelectric load cell and a Kistler [88] Charge Meter (Type 5015A) 
and the specimen strain response was measured with 5mm gauge length 
strain gauges (KFG-5-120-C1-11L3M3R) and a FLYDE [89] Transducer 
Amplifier (Type FE-579-TA).  The single axial strain gauge was bonded 
symmetrically mid-width and mid-length of each specimen.  Load cell and 
strain gauge readings (quarter bridge circuit) were recorded at a sample 
rate of 200 kHz on to computer using a Data Translation [90] high speed 
simultaneous USB data acquisition module (Type DT 9836) and the 
Measure Foundry [90] software.  A crosshead mass of 85kg was used 
which impacted the specimens at 3 m/s giving an initial strain rate of 100/s 
based on the gauge length in Figure 6-1 (c). 
6.3 Experimental Results 
This section presents the results of the quasi static and intermediate strain 
rate testing detailed in the methodology in section 6.2. 
6.3.1 Quasi Static Results 
This section presents the results of the quasi static experimental testing 
detailed in the methodology in section 6.2.2.  The stress strain responses 
for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy samples are shown in Figure 6-3, 
Figure 6-4 and Figure 6-5 for in-plane tension, compression and shear 
respectively.  Images of the tested samples are shown for in-plane tension 
in Figure 6-6 and Figure 6-7 for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy samples 
respectively.  The images of the in-plane compression and in-plane shear 
tested samples are shown in Figure 6-8 and Figure 6-9 respectively for 
both carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy.  The numbers in the legend of the 
stress strain curve match the numbers in the images of the tested samples.  
Some numbers are missing from the stress strain curves; this is due to 
being unable to generate the stress strain curve due to invalid data from 
the video extensometer.  Figure 6-2 summarises the mean and standard 
- 143 - 
deviation of the moduli and ultimate stresses for the quasi-static tests in 
tension, compression and shear.  
Figure 6-2.  Quasi static experimental results. The top and bottom table show 
results for stiffness and strength respectively.  Results are shown in in-plane 
tension, compression and shear for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy 
Figure 6-3.  Quasi static in-plane tension stress strain responses for carbon/epoxy 
and S2 glass/epoxy samples 
Figure 6-4.  Quasi static in-plane compression stress strain responses for 
carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy samples 
- 144 - 
Figure 6-5.  Quasi static in-plane shear stress strain responses for carbon/epoxy 
and S2 glass/epoxy samples 
Figure 6-6.  Quasi static in-plane tension carbon/epoxy tested samples, front and 
side view. Samples 1-6 left to right. 
Figure 6-7.  Quasi static in-plane tension S2 glass/epoxy tested samples, front and 
side view.  Samples 1-5 left to right. 
- 145 - 
Figure 6-8.  Quasi static in-plane compression carbon/epoxy (top row samples 1-5 
left to right) and S2 glass/epoxy (bottom row samples 1-5 left to right) tested 
samples, front and side view 
Figure 6-9.  Quasi static in-plane shear carbon/epoxy (left) and S2 glass/epoxy 
(right) tested samples, front view.  Samples 1-6 left to right. 
6.3.2 Intermediate Strain Rate Results 
This section presents the results of the intermediate strain rate 
experimental testing detailed in the methodology in section 6.2.3.  The in-
plane compression stress strain responses for carbon/epoxy and S2 
glass/epoxy samples are shown in Figure 6-11 and Figure 6-12 
respectively.  Images of the tested samples are shown in Figure 6-13.  The 
numbers in the legend of the stress strain curves match the numbers in the 
images of the tested samples.  There is no stress strain curve for 
carbon/epoxy test 1 (C1); this is due to being unable to generate the 
stress strain curve due to invalid data from the strain gauges.  Figure 6-10 
summarises the mean and standard deviation of the moduli and ultimate 
stresses for the intermediate strain rate tests in compression.  
- 146 - 
Figure 6-10.  Intermediate strain rate experimental results. The top and bottom 
table show results for stiffness and strength respectively.  Results are shown in in-
plane compression for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy 
Figure 6-11.  Intermediate strain rate in-plane compression stress strain responses 
for carbon/epoxy samples. 
- 147 - 
Figure 6-12.  Intermediate strain rate in-plane compression stress strain responses 
for S2 glass/epoxy samples. 
- 148 - 
Figure 6-13.  Intermediate strain rate in-plane compression carbon/epoxy (top row 
samples 1-5 left to right) and S2 glass/epoxy (bottom row samples 1-5 left to right) 
tested samples, front and side view 
- 149 - 
6.4 Discussion 
6.4.1 Quasi Static Results 
Stress Strain Responses 
The quasi static stress strain response for both carbon/epoxy and S2 
glass/epoxy in in-plane tension and in-plane compression, see Figure 6-3 
and Figure 6-4, is approximately linear elastic up to a maximum value of 
stress.  The quasi static stress strain response for both carbon/epoxy and 
S2 glass/epoxy in in-plane shear, see Figure 6-5, shows an initial linear 
elastic region followed by a gradual reduction in stiffness up to a maximum 
value of stress. 
After reaching the maximum values of stress for carbon/epoxy in in-plane 
tension and for both carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy in in-plane shear 
there is an abrupt reduction in stress to practically zero.  This abrupt 
reduction in stress to practically zero also occurs for the S2 glass/epoxy 
sample 5 in in-plane tension and for the carbon/epoxy samples 3, 4 and 5 
in in-plane compression. 
S2 glass/epoxy samples 1, 2, 3 and 4 in in-plane tension, carbon/epoxy 
sample 1 in in-plane compression and S2 glass/epoxy samples 1, 2 and 3 
in in-plane compression show a gradual step by step reduction in stress 
after reaching the maximum value of stress.  This is not shown in the 
stress strain curves in Figure 6-3 and Figure 6-4 as the video extensometer 
does not perform well with a cycle of large reductions in stress then large 
increases of stress so the data is only valid up to the maximum value of 
stress, which has been plotted in the stress strain curves.  The force time 
curves recorded on the Instron test machine gives information of the 
gradual step by step reduction in stress for the samples discussed in this 
paragraph and are shown in Figure 6-14.  To summarise; one S2 
glass/epoxy sample in in-plane tension has an abrupt failure whilst all 
other are gradual and one carbon/epoxy sample in in-plane compression 
has a gradual failure whilst all others are abrupt.  All S2 glass/epoxy 
samples in in-plane compression have a gradual failure. 
- 150 - 
Figure 6-14.  Force Time responses for those responses that show gradual step 
reductions in force / stress after the maximum value. 
Damage Mechanisms 
Carbon/epoxy in-plane tension samples failed through cracking across the 
width of the samples, perpendicular to the loading direction, see Figure 
6-6.  These cracks occurred due to matrix cracking, transverse yarn pull 
out and longitudinal yarn fracture generating the abrupt reduction in 
stiffness seen in Figure 6-3.  In samples 1-4 the damage is very localised 
to the crack across the width of the samples, however, in samples 5 and 6, 
although there is a clear crack across the width of the sample, the damage 
spreads further along the length of the samples with extensive 
delamination and pull out of lamina layers.  The stress strain responses for 
samples 5 and 6 in Figure 6-3 are the stiffest of all responses. It is 
however difficult to attribute this completely to the final state of failure. 
S2 glass/epoxy in-plane tension samples fail through a gradual process of 
longitudinal fibres splitting and splaying away from the sample, see Figure 
6-7.  This damage works its way inwards (through the thickness) from the 
front and back face of the samples until there is only a small amount of 
load bearing material left mid-thickness of the samples.  This section then 
splits causing final failure.  This gradual failure mechanism gives the step 
reductions in force shown in the force time curves in Figure 6-14.  The 
- 151 - 
reason for S2 glass/epoxy sample 5 failing abruptly rather than gradually, 
see Figure 6-3, is due to the difference in failure mechanism seen in Figure 
6-7.  Sample 5 fails with a crack across the width, perpendicular to the 
loading direction, at the bottom of the sample.  This failure most likely 
occurred due to manufacturing defects such as a resin rich region or the 
presence of voids leading to stress concentrations in that particular region. 
Carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy in-plane compression samples failed 
through delamination, fibre kinking and through thickness shear as shown 
in Figure 6-8 and Figure 6-15.  The carbon/epoxy samples sustain much 
more damage than the S2 glass/epoxy samples.  The reason for 
carbon/epoxy sample 1 failing gradually rather than abruptly as all the 
other samples did is due to the difference in failure mechanism seen in 
Figure 6-8.  Looking at the side view it is clear to see sample 1 has 
sustained a significant larger amount of damage than the other samples. 
Figure 6-15.  Optical micrograph of in-plane compression specimen edited from [6] 
Carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy in-plane shear samples failed through 
delamination and sliding of lamina layers.  This generates the cracks seen 
in Figure 6-9 which are at a 45 angle to the specimen sides i.e. in the 
45 layup direction.  The S2 glass/epoxy samples experience more 
damage with a greater amount of sliding of layers over one another.  This 
- 152 - 
produces the larger strain to failure for S2 glass/epoxy samples than 
carbon/epoxy samples seen in the stress strain responses in Figure 6-5.  It 
can also be seen that there is a large variation in the strain to failure 
between different samples tested.    This variation occurs due to the 
difference in samples from manufacturing causing a different amount of 
delamination and layer sliding. 
Modelling and Experimental Comparison 
This section compares the experimental results with the results obtained by 
the multi-scale modelling procedures presented in this thesis.  These multi-
scale modelling results have been derived from a long process of both 
micro and meso scale modelling where the results of micro scale modelling 
provided the input properties for meso scale modelling.  The properties for 
quasi-static stiffness and strength for both carbon/epoxy and S2 
glass/epoxy in in-plane tension, compression and shear are shown in 
Figure 6-16 for both experimental and modelling results.  
Figure 6-16.  Comparison of quasi static experimental results and modelling results 
at a strain rate of 1/s. The top and bottom table show results for stiffness and 
strength respectively.  Results are shown in in-plane tension, compression and 
shear for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy. 
The experimental and modelling values for stiffness for both materials in 
in-plane tension and in-plane compression compare very well.  However, 
the modelling results slightly under-predict the in-plane shear stiffness.  
The experimental and modelling values for strength for both materials in all 
loading conditions do not compare well.  The modelling results significantly 
over-predict the strength in in-plane tension and in-plane compression and 
slightly under-predict the strength in in-plane shear. 
Although the strength prediction is not accurate the modelling framework is 
picking up key features such as how the in-plane tensile strength is greater 
- 153 - 
than the in-plane compressive strength for both materials.  Experimentally 
the in-plane tensile strength is 61% and 20% greater than the in-plane 
compressive strength for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy respectively.  
Numerically the in-plane tensile strength is 117% and 23% greater than 
the in-plane compressive strength for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy 
respectively. 
The reason for the differences between experimental and modelling results 
is likely to be a result of the input material properties chosen for the micro 
scale modelling.  These input properties were from literature and were not 
for the exact type of carbon, glass and epoxy used to manufacture the 
experimental samples.  The results from the micro modelling are used in 
meso scale modelling; hence, the error will be carried through the multi-
scale modelling process.  Another reason could be that the micro and meso 
scale modelling was conducted on idealised structures.  The experimental 
samples do not have uniform hexagonal packing of fibres within the yarns 
at the micro scale or a perfect 0/90 or 45 yarn architecture at the 
meso scale.  This would usually lead to the modelling over-predicting 
strength values; which is the case for in-plane tension and in-plane 
compression testing which are fibre dependent modes of testing.  Another 
consideration is that, in reality, not all fibres have the same value of 
strength; this is often taken into account in modelling work with random 
values of strength being assigned within a defined range to each fibre 
modelled.  Zhao and Takeda [91] investigated the effect of interfacial 
adhesion and statistical fibre strength on the tensile strength of UD 
glass/epoxy composites.  The researchers investigated the effect of five 
different fibre surface treatments.  For each fibre surface treatment around 
forty tensile tests of single filaments were conducted on 24mm long 
specimens at 0.3 mm/min on a mini tester with a 4.9N load cell.  For all 
surface treatments there was a large standard deviation from the average 
fibre strength.  For example, water sized surface treatment resulted in an 
average fibre strength of 2.24 GPa with a standard deviation of 0.97.  The 
maximum and minimum fibre strength was 4.73 GPa and 0.89 GPa 
respectively.  It is clear to see form these results that fibres within a 
composite will not all have the same strength and the range of values can 
be large.  Failure of the weakest fibre in a composite material can cause 
the onset of further damage mechanisms which can lead to ultimate failure 
of the component. 
- 154 - 
Ultimately the composite may only be as strong as the weakest fibre, as 
the failure of this fibre could lead to the initiation of further damage 
mechanisms.   
A simple ROM calculation to determine the axial tensile strength of a UD 
lamina with the tensile fibre strength, tensile matrix strength and fibre 
volume properties given in Appendix B gives values of 3289 MPa and 2549 
MPa for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy respectively.  Making the 
assumption that in a cross-ply laminate the transverse layers contribute 
nothing to the strength then the cross-ply laminate strength would reduce 
to 50% of the values above giving 1644.5 MPa and 1274.5 MPa for 
carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy respectively.  These values are clearly 
greater (by at least a factor of 2) than the experimentally measured values 
obtained.  It is believed that by using manufacturers values for fibre 
strength we are significantly overestimating the actual fibre strength and in 
turn the yarn strength and cross-ply laminate strength. 
Until now, all reasons for the differences between experimental and 
modelling results have been explained due to issues with the modelling; 
however, defects within the samples due to manufacturing issues are also 
likely to account for some of the discrepancy.  Some tested samples had 
localised variations in thickness leading to cross sections of smaller areas 
which could lead to increased areas of stress.  The thickness of the tested 
samples was taken to be an average of measurements at three points 
along the samples length.  Resin rich regions and voids will also create 
stress concentrations and possibly lead to premature failure of the 
samples.  There is evidence in the literature for this.  For example, short 
beam shear and three-point flexure testing performed on [0/90]4S 
carbon/epoxy laminates by Ghiorse [92] showed that for every 1% 
increase in void volume fraction, the inter-laminar shear strength reduced 
by 5%-15%.  Figure 6-17 shows an example of the cross sections of the 
carbon and glass laminates tested in the previous sections of this chapter.  
It is clear to see inter-yarn (in between the different yarns) and intra-yarn 
(within yarns) voids which could have generated premature failure due to 
the stress concentrations they develop.  The average void volume fractions 
within the laminates are 2.4% and 1.5% for the carbon/epoxy and S2 
glass/epoxy laminates respectively.  Measurements were made by 
calculating the area fraction of the images in Figure 6-17 after they had 
- 155 - 
been cropped, to remove non-laminate sections, and a threshold applied to 
only show void regions utilising the ImageJ [73] software package.  The 
samples measured were spare experimental test specimens that were cut 
from the same laminates as the actual test specimens.  It is not just the 
void volume fraction which could cause premature failure but also the size 
of the voids, in some cases they are as large as a lamina layer, see Figure 
6-17.  In addition, Figure 6-17 shows the variety of yarn shapes and the 
change in the yarn paths across the laminate, clearly different to the 
idealised meso scale unit cell geometry.  An extreme case of change in 
yarn path is seen for the carbon/epoxy samples in Figure 6-17 where at 
the bottom of the micrograph the yarn (with a left to right longitudinal 
direction) disappears out of the plane of the micrograph for a small section.  
The effect of fibre orientation variation like this was studied by Vallons et al 
[93] for the tensile strength of biaxial carbon/epoxy NCF composites.  The 
researchers manufactured NCF chain stitched biaxial 45 carbon/epoxy 
fully symmetric 2.1mm thick composite plates with a fibre volume fraction 
of around 57%.  The samples were cut with different orientations relative 
to one of fibre directions and tested in quasi static tension.  For 25mm wide 
test samples, cut with a 5 orientation, the stiffness and strength 
decreased by 10% and 50% respectively when compared to the 0 
orientation samples. This demonstrates a significant potential reduction in 
strength.  For the tested samples in this thesis, Figure 6-17 indicates that 
the orientation of the fibres can vary significantly from the 0 orientation. 
The manufacture of the laminates and the cutting of the laminates into 
samples can both contribute to this variation. 
- 156 - 
Figure 6-17.  Example optical micrographs of the cross sections of 0/90 NCF cross-
ply S2 glass/epoxy (top) and carbon/epoxy (bottom) laminates tested in this 
chapter. 
6.4.2 Intermediate Strain Rate Results 
Stress Strain Responses 
The stress strain responses for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy samples 
tested at intermediate strain rates in in-plane compression are given in 
Figure 6-11 and Figure 6-12 respectively.  These dynamic stress strain 
curves exhibit an initial non-linear region followed by linear elastic 
deformation.  The initial non-linear region does not represent the material 
response; it is instead due to the slack and alignment of the specimen in 
the compression test fixture.  The dynamic elastic modulus is not measured 
from this non-linear region, it is measured from the linear elastic region 
indicated in the stress strain curves in Figure 6-11 and Figure 6-12 by the 
red region with a linear least squares trend line. 
The linear elastic region is followed by yielding at a maximum value of 
stress, plastic deformation and finally failure which is indicated by a large 
reduction in stress.  In some responses there are multiple yield points of 
the stress strain curve where there is a large drop in stress followed by a 
large increase in stress to a higher value than the previous yield point.  
This is seen in response number 5 for carbon/epoxy (C5) in Figure 6-11 
- 157 - 
and response number 2 and 5 for S2 glass/epoxy (G2 and G5) in Figure 
6-12. 
Damage Mechanisms 
The carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy intermediate strain rate samples 
tested in in-plane compression fail in a similar manner to the quasi static 
strain rate samples described in section 6.4.1.  The failure is due to 
delamination, fibre kinking and through thickness shear.  The tested 
dynamic samples are shown in Figure 6-13. 
Strain Rate Dependence 
The average stiffness and strength values for quasi static and intermediate 
strain rate tested specimens are given in Figure 6-18 for both 
carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy in in-plane compression loading.  It is 
important to note that values of stiffness and strength from intermediate 
strain rate responses 3 for carbon/epoxy (C3) and 2 and 3 for S2 
glass/epoxy (G2 and G3) were removed from the averaging calculations.  
It was decided that the responses were significantly different to the other 
responses i.e.  in some cases the stiffness was more than double some of 
the other responses which all fell within a narrow range of values indicated 
by the low standard deviation values. The reason for these untypical results 
was most likely a result of noisy strain gauge data which made it difficult to 
process the stress strain curves. 
Figure 6-18.  Experimental values of stiffness and strength for carbon/epoxy and S2 
glass/epoxy samples at quasi static (0.001/s) and intermediate (100/s) rates of 
strain in in-plane compression. 
Experimentally the stiffness and strength both increase with increasing 
strain rate for both carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy samples.  The 
stiffness increases by 92% and 119% for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy 
samples respectively.  The strength increases by 48% and 18% for 
carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy samples respectively. 
Hosur et al [25] experimentally tested cross ply carbon epoxy laminates in 
in-plane compression over a range of strain rates.  The dynamic stiffness 
- 158 - 
and strength values were larger than the static stiffness and strength 
values.  For cross ply in-plane compression loading, the stiffness and peak 
stress increased by 114% and 17% respectively when comparing quasi 
static loading to loading at 82 /s (compared to 100/s strain rate 
experimentally tested in this thesis).  This compares with the increased 
values of 92% and 48% in this work for stiffness and strength respectively. 
The similarities between the test results in this paper and those in Hosurs 
work are: the stiffness experiences a larger increase than strength with 
increasing strain rate and the stiffness increases by around a factor of two 
when comparing quasi static to intermediate strain rates. 
Modelling and Experimental Comparison 
The stiffness and strength values for quasi static (1/s) and intermediate 
strain rate testing (100/s) on carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy meso scale 
unit cells in in-plane compression are given in Figure 6-19.  The values are 
obtained from the stiffness and strength against the natural log of the 
strain rate plots from the in-plane compression meso scale modelling 
results given in Appendix D and supplied here in Figure 6-20.  Substituting 
values of ln(1) and ln(100), i.e. 0 and 4.6, into the least squares linear 
trend line equation gives the values of stiffness and strength at 1/s and 
100/s strain rates.  These calculations are required as simulations were 
conducted at 1, 1000 and 10000/s only; not 100/s. 
Figure 6-19.  Modelling values of stiffness and strength for carbon/epoxy and S2 
glass/epoxy meso scale unit cells at quasi static (1/s) and intermediate (100/s) 
rates of strain 
- 159 - 
Carbon/Epoxy 
S2 Glass/Epoxy 
Figure 6-20.  Stiffness and Strength against the natural log of the strain rate plots 
for in-plane compression loading of carbon/epoxy (top) and S2 glass/epoxy 
(bottom) meso scale unit cells.  The blue dots are results at 1/s, 1000/s and 
10000/s. 
From the modelling results the stiffness and strength both increase with 
increasing strain rate in in-plane compression for both carbon/epoxy and 
S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cells.  The stiffness increases by 2.5% and 
1.7% for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cells 
respectively.  The strength increases by 70.2% and 25.4% for 
carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cells respectively.  
Comparing this to the experimental increases in stiffness and strength from 
quasi static to 100/s strain rates the strength increases compare 
reasonably well; 48% compared to 70.2% for carbon/epoxy and 18% 
compared to 25.4% for S2 glass/epoxy.  The stiffness increases, however, 
do not compare well with the experimental results showing a increase of 
roughly a factor of two and the modelling results showing little change at 
The differences between experimental and modelling results in terms of the 
percentage change in stiffness and strength with strain rate are likely to be 
due to, from a modelling perspective, the fact that fibre strain rate 
dependence was not included at the micro scale.  The fibre strain rate 
depdendece was not included due to the limited literatue data availiable.  
The papers that were found, and referenced in the literature review of this 
thesis in section 2.2.4,  indicated that carbon fibres were regarded as 
- 160 - 
strain rate insensitive and that glass fibres were strain rate dependent over 
a low strain rate range.  High strain rate testing of single glass fibres was 
not found in the literature, presumably due to the difficulty of this type of 
experimental testing.  It is also important to mention that there are 
difficulties in establishing the elastic regions of the intermediate strain rate 
experimental results and hence the straight line fits to establish the elastic 
moduli may not be truly representative of the material response, see the 
stress strain responses in Figure 6-11 and Figure 6-12.  
- 161 - 
7 Conclusions and Recommendations 
7.1 Introduction 
This chapter begins with a general discussion of the work and the main 
conclusions from the work conducted.  This will then be followed by an 
outline of recommendations for future work. 
7.2 Discussion 
Multi-Scale Modelling 
A hierarchical multi-scale modelling approach has been demonstrated with 
finite element modelling occurring at the micro, meso and macro scale of 
analysis.  Information has been transferred between the scales in the form 
of material properties.  The key and novel feature of this work is that the 
effect of strain rate on stiffness and strength has been captured at each 
scale and this information transferred to the proceeding larger scale.  Some 
key issues became apparent in the homogenisation of material properties 
due to the vast amount of data from one scale of analysis that had to be 
condensed for the higher scale of analysis.   For example, how does one 
utilise the results from eight loading modes tested at three strain rates at 
the micro scale in the meso scale modelling.  Choices made in the 
information transfer process can have a dramatic effect at the higher scale 
of analysis.  For example, the micro scale modelling produces eight strain 
rate scaling constants for strength i.e. the strength scales differently in 
each micro scale loading mode.  These eight constants are averaged into 
one strain rate scaling constant for strength for use in the meso scale yarn 
material model.  The average value is comparable to most of the individual 
micro values except the longitudinal values which are smaller.  The effect is 
that yarn longitudinal strength at the meso scale is over scaled with 
increasing strain rate.  Although it is clear that further work is required to 
improve the multi-scale modelling process an excellent framework has 
been set out to enable virtual material characterisation to progress in the 
field of composite materials.  The entire multi-scale virtual material 
characterisation procedure has already been demonstrated with the micro 
and meso scale modelling in this thesis being used in blast and ballistic 
modelling on macro scale composite laminates.  For such complex multi-
- 162 - 
scale modelling to progress it is believed that automation is of paramount 
importance and this has been advanced through the use of Python 
programming within Abaqus.  Python was utilised to fully set up 
simulations at both the micro and meso scale.  The programming was 
particularly useful in performing repetitive tasks such as applying linear 
constraint equations on a node by node basis to implement periodic 
boundary conditions based on translational symmetry.  Python 
programming was further utilised to operate on simulation output files and 
produce stress strain data as well as calculate key parameters such as 
stiffness and strength. 
Composite Material Models 
This work has created and developed advanced material models in the form 
of user subroutines, coded in Fortran, in the Abaqus explicit finite element 
code.  Material models have been created for fibre and interface at the 
micro scale, yarn at the meso scale and matrix at the micro and meso 
scales.  The material models control the initial linear elastic response, 
damage initiation, damage evolution and strain rate dependence.  The 
section of the material models that deals with damage incorporates 
damage initiation, based on the maximum stress criterion, and damage 
evolution, based on a damage mechanics approach or element deletion, 
depending on the material constituent.  It was deemed that the maximum 
stress criterion would be appropriate for this type of modelling, however, 
current commercial material models use more advanced and often 
interactive criteria.  This is something that would have to be investigated in 
a multi-scale modelling process in future work.  It could well be discovered 
that the extra complexity of the more advanced failure criteria would be 
lost in the information transfer process of material properties.   The 
damage mechanics approach used for certain constituents to control post 
elastic behaviour produced excellent results in terms of gradual reductions 
in stress with increasing strain.  The use of element deletion in certain 
constituents gave obviously very little control over the failure process but 
was used in constituents where it was deemed failure would most likely be 
brittle e.g. fibres.  Strain rate dependence is incorporated in certain 
constituents through logarithmic equations which scale the stiffness and 
strength.  The input properties for this at the micro scale were from 
experimental testing and the results demonstrated clear increases of 
stiffness and strength with increasing strain rate.  The clear weakness of 
- 163 - 
such an advanced composite material model is the large amount of 
development time in writing and testing the code within the desired finite 
element package.  It is important to consider the failure mechanisms that 
were not captured in this work, such as fibre kinking.  The micro scale 
model was not longitudinally thick enough to see the kinking / buckling of 
fibres and there was no attempt to represent this failure mechanism at the 
meso and macro scale.  One, however, could argue that the use of a lower 
value for compressive strength than tensile strength of the fibres at the 
micro scale went some way to address this failure mechanism.  
Micro Scale Modelling 
The micro scale finite element modelling conducted in this doctoral thesis 
involved the testing of carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy unidirectional 
composites.  Idealised hexagonally packed unit cells were tested in 
longitudinal tension, longitudinal compression, transverse tension (two 
directions), transverse compression (two directions), longitudinal shear and 
transverse shear.  All loading conditions were tested at 1/s, 1000/s and 
10000/s rates of strain.  The micro scale modelling predicted the linear 
elastic response, damage initiation and its evolution with increasing strain 
and the strain rate dependence of stiffness and strength.  The resulting 
micro unit cell stiffness values compared well to the Rule of Mixtures 
predictions, especially in longitudinal loading for which the analytical 
predications are most reliable and accurate.  It is however believed that 
the strength values were over predicted due to the fibre input properties 
and a statistical fibre strength approach would have yielded better 
comparisons to analytical methods and experimental testing.  The micro 
unit cell modelling captured gradual, in transverse tension, compression 
and shear loading, and abrupt, in longitudinal tension, compression and 
shear loading, reductions in stiffness in the post elastic response.  This was 
achieved through the material models with matrix dominated responses 
being based on maximum stress criterion and continuum damage 
mechanics theory and fibre/interface dominated responses being based on 
maximum stress criterion and element deletion.  Micro unit cell stiffness 
and strength was shown to increase with strain rate in all loading modes 
except longitudinal loading.  The location of damage initiation and its 
progression through the micro scale unit cell with increasing strain was 
physically captured on a 3D meshed model. The key damage mechanics 
simulated were matrix cracking, fibre fracture and interfacial damage. 
- 164 - 
Meso Scale Modelling 
The meso scale finite element modelling conducted in this doctoral thesis 
involved the testing of carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy 0/90 NCF 
composite laminates.  Meso scale unit cells were tested in in-plane tension, 
in-plane compression, through thickness tension, through thickness-
compression, in-plane shear and through thickness shear.  All loading 
conditions were tested at 1/s, 1000/s and 10000/s rates of strain.  The 
meso scale modelling predicted the linear elastic response, damage 
initiation and its evolution with increasing strain and the strain rate 
dependence of stiffness and strength.  As with the micro modelling the 
meso modelling also captured the physical locations of damage and its 
progression in yarn or matrix material. The majority of stress strain 
responses for the meso scale unit cell produced abrupt reductions in 
stiffness in the post elastic response.  Gradual reductions in stiffness in the 
post elastic response occurred when the material response was matrix 
dominated, e.g. carbon/epoxy in through thickness shear, with significant 
damage occurring in the through thickness matrix regions.  Meso unit cell 
stiffness and strength was shown to increase with strain rate in all loading 
conditions, except in-plane loading where only strength increased.  It was 
not expected that in-plane meso scale loading would show a significant 
increase in strength with increasing strain rate as in-plane loading is a 
longitudinal yarn dominated response and micro scale longitudinal loading 
gave little rate dependence.  The reduction and averaging of micro scale 
modelling data caused this issue for strength as the strain rate scaling 
constants for strength from all micro loading modes were averaged into 
one yarn strength strain rate scaling constant for use at the meso scale.  
The same issue was not apparent for stiffness as three strain rate scaling 
constants for stiffness were used for the meso scale yarn material model; 
one for longitudinal, transverse and shear stiffness.  The longitudinal strain 
rate scaling constant for stiffness was much lower than the transverse and 
shear value allowing strain rate dependence of stiffness in through 
thickness and shear loading and not in-plane loading.  This work has 
indicated the shortcomings of some current strain rate dependent material 
models where only one strength strain rate scaling constant is utilised.   
- 165 - 
Experimental Testing 
To validated the meso scale modelling, and in turn the overall multi-scale 
modelling framework, 0/90 NCF carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy meso 
scale samples were tested in in-plane tension, compression and shear at 
low (all loading modes) and intermediate (compression only) strain rates.  
The testing was conducted on; an electromechanical universal static test 
machine and an instrumented falling weight drop tower.  The quasi static 
experimental and modelling values for stiffness for both materials in in-
plane tension and in-plane compression compared very well.  However, the 
modelling results slightly under-predict the quasi static in-plane shear 
stiffness.  The quasi static experimental and modelling values for strength 
for both materials in all loading conditions did not compare well.  The 
modelling results significantly over-predicted the quasi static strength in in-
plane tension and in-plane compression and slightly under-predicted the 
quasi static strength in in-plane shear.  From the modelling results the 
stiffness and strength both increased with increasing strain rate (from 
quasi static to 100 /s) in in-plane compression for both carbon/epoxy and 
S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cells.  The stiffness increased by 2.5% and 
1.7% for carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cells 
respectively.  The strength increased by 70.2% and 25.4% for 
carbon/epoxy and S2 glass/epoxy meso scale unit cells respectively.  
Comparing this to the experimental increases in stiffness and strength from 
quasi static to 100/s strain rates the strength increases compare 
reasonably well; 48% compared to 70.2% for carbon/epoxy and 18% 
compared to 25.4% for S2 glass/epoxy.  The stiffness increases, however, 
do not compare well with the experimental results showing an increase of 
roughly a factor of two and the modelling results showing little change at 
all.  The reasons for the differences for modelling and experimental results 
have been discussed with the main reasons likely to be idealised 
micro/meso geometries and manufactuers fibre strength data, rather than 
statistical fibre strengths, giving large modelling strength predictions and 
voids, resin rich regions, local variations in thickness and variations in yarn 
shapes and paths giving low experimental strength values. 
- 166 - 
7.3 Conclusions 
In this section the major conclusions of this doctoral investigation are 
presented. 
 Multi-scale modelling has shown promise to be a viable alternative 
to experimental testing in the future in predicting component level 
material properties. 
 The material models implemented in the multi-scale modelling 
process have predicted the linear elastic response, damage initiation 
and its evolution with increasing strain and the strain rate 
dependence of stiffness and strength at both the micro and meso 
scale of analysis. 
 Finite element modelling on micro scale unit cells enabled the 
prediction of meso scale yarn properties that compared well to 
analytical methods. 
 Finite element modelling on meso scale unit cells enabled the 
prediction of macro scale properties.  The properties were validated 
against experimental testing on 0/90 NCF laminates.  Quasi static 
stiffness values compared well and the modelling picked up some 
key strain rate dependent features that were apparent in the 
experimental results. 
 Discrepancies between modelling and experimental results, 
primarily for strength, were attributed to non-representative 
modelling due to using idealised micro/meso geometries and 
manufacturers fibre strength data, rather than implementing 
statistical fibre strengths.  The effect of defects, voids and fibre 
orientation issues, within the experimental samples was also 
deemed account for some of the discrepancy. 
7.4 Recommendations for Future Work 
The work conducted in this thesis has generated numerous areas of 
possible future work that, if conducted, would be beneficial to the 
continued development of high strain rate multi scale modelling of polymer 
composite materials.  The recommendations for future work are 
summarised below. 
- 167 - 
Micro Scale Experimental Testing: 
 The strain rate dependence of the fibres at the micro scale is not 
considered in this study.  It is widely accepted that carbon fibres are 
strain rate insensitive in the sense that strain rate has a negligible 
effect on stiffness, ultimate strength and failure strain [19, 20].  
However, it has been shown by Yazici [21] that S2 glass fibres can 
demonstrate strain rate sensitivity.  Yazici only tested the fibres 
over a range of strain rates below 1/s; hence, experimental testing 
of S2 glass fibres from quasi static to high rates of strain would 
yield valuable information which could be included in the micro scale 
fibre material model in this thesis. 
 It is recommended that an experimental test program be conducted 
on an epoxy matrix material in tension, compression and shear over 
the full range of strain rates from quasi static to thousands per 
second.  This would show how stiffness and strength scale with 
increasing strain rate in all three loading conditions.  The matrix 
material model in this thesis used strain rate scaling constants from 
compression testing for all three loading condition values.  There is 
a distinct lack of data in the literature on the high strain rate testing 
of epoxy matrix material in tension and shear due to the added 
complexity of modifying high strain rate test equipment such as the 
split Hopkinson bar. 
 An experimental program to test micro scale samples in all loading 
conditions over a range of strain rates would help to verify the 
modelling results obtained. 
Meso Scale Experimental Testing: 
 An experimental program to test meso scale samples in all loading 
conditions over a range of strain rates would help to verify the 
modelling results obtained. 
Micro Scale Modelling: 
 Micro scale testing of representative volume elements with 
randomly dispersed fibres would give an insight into the difference 
in material properties when compared to an idealised packing, such 
as hexagonal as in this thesis.  Figure 7-1 shows some early work 
that the thesis author has already conducted in this area, where an 
RVE with randomly placed fibres is tested in transverse tension. 
- 168 - 
Figure 7-1.  Representative volume element (RVE) containing 40% randomly placed 
fibres with randomly assigned fibre radii within a defined range.  Shaded area 
shows original RVE and deformed shape occurs due to transverse tension.  25% 
strain applied to right edge in an implicit analysis, left and bottom edges have zero 
normal displacement.  Contours show von Mises stress where red indicates high 
stress and blue indicates low stress. 
Meso Scale Modelling: 
 When converting micro scale results into meso scale properties 
some of the detail is lost in the homogenisation process.  The meso 
scale yarn material model only has four strain rate scaling constants 
(longitudinal stiffness, transverse stiffness, shear stiffness and 
strength) whereas the micro scale modelling results could have 
provided a lot more e.g. strain rate scaling constants for strengths 
in all loading conditions.  A re-run of the meso scale simulations 
with more detailed material properties would provide interesting 
results for comparison. 
 The modelling methodology in this thesis has focused on NCF.  It 
would be an interesting study to extend the type of meso scale unit 
cells tested to woven fabrics and other more complex fabric 
architectures. 
 Meso scale variability such as the change of yarn shape along the 
yarn path would be a new interesting area of study. 
General Modelling: 
 A comparison of damage contour plots for two different types of 
failure criteria would be an interesting piece of work.  One could use 
- 169 - 
maximum principal stress, amongst a multitude of others, instead of 
the maximum stress criterion used in this thesis. 
 This work in this thesis has been limited to epoxy matrix materials 
and carbon and S2 glass fibres.  The methodology can, and should, 
be applied to other types of composite materials such as those with 
polyester, vinyl ester and thermoplastic matrix materials with 
possible aramid fibre inclusions.  However, for success, constituent 
material data would be needed for these materials. 
 The influence of voids and material defects in the material 
properties is a large area of research.  The effect of this on the high 
strain rate properties of polymer composite materials is unknown 
and is recommended for future work. 
 The boundary conditions used in this thesis allow for easy 
application of multi axial loading in micro and meso scale modelling 
e.g. bi-axial compression.  It was considered outside the scope of 
this thesis but would be an obvious area for future development.  
Figure 7-2 shows some early work that the thesis author has 
already conducted in this area, where a micro scale unit cell is 
subjected to multi axial loading. 
Figure 7-2.  Carbon/epoxy micro scale unit cell damage contour plots showing initial 
damage locations at various steps of the analysis (top row) and von Mises stress 
contours (bottom row) for first step of analysis at 10000/s in (a) transverse x 
compression, (b) transverse xy shear and (c) multi axial loading combining 
transverse x compression and transverse xy shear.  For top row blue indicates no 
damage and red indicates maximum damage.  For bottom row red indicates high 
stress and blue indicates low stress.  
- 170 - 
References 
1. AGY Product Information S2 Glass Fibers. [cited 09/07/12]; Availiable from: 
http://www.agy.com. 
2. Joint Improvised Explosive Device Defeat Organization (JIEDDO): Annual 
Report 2010. Availiable from: www.jieddo.dod.mil/. 
3. BBC News Website: Q&A Snatch Land Rovers. [cited 31/05/11]; Availiable 
from: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/7703703.stm. 
4. BBC News Website: MoD signs deal to replace Snatch vehicle with Foxhound. 
[cited 31/05/11]; Availiable from: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-11877801. 
5. French, M. and A. Wright, 'Developing mine blast resistance for composite 
based military vehicles', in N Uddin (ed.), Blast protection of civil 
infrastructures and vehicles using composites, 2010, Woodhead Publishing 
Limited, Cambridge. p. 244-268. 
6. Brown, K.A., R. Brooks, and N.A. Warrior, The static and high strain rate 
behaviour of a commingled E-glass/polypropylene woven fabric composite. 
Composites Science and Technology, 2010. 70(2): p. 272-283. 
7. Encyclopedia Britannica Website. [cited 25/11/11]; Availiable from: 
http://www.britannica.com. 
8. Edgren, F., et al., Formation of damage and its effects on non-crimp fabric 
reinforced composites loaded in tension. Composites Science and Technology, 
2004. 64(5): p. 675-692. 
9. Hull, D. and T.W. Clyne, An Introduction to Composite Materials1996: 
Cambridge University Press. 
10. Plymouth University Website. [cited 29/09/11]; Availiable from: 
http://www.tech.plym.ac.uk/sme/MATS324/MATS324A4%20fracture.htm. 
11. Mattsson, D., R. Joffe, and J. Varna, Damage in NCF composites under 
tension: Effect of layer stacking sequence. Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 
2008. 75(9): p. 2666-2682. 
12. Littell, J.D., et al., Measurement of epoxy resin tension, compression, and 
shear stress-strain curves over a wide range of strain rates using small test 
specimens. Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 2008. 21(3): p. 162-173. 
13. Gilat, A., R.K. Goldberg, and G.D. Roberts, Strain rate sensitivity of epoxy resin 
in tensile and shear loading. Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 2007. 20(2): p. 
75-89. 
14. Jordan, J.L., J.R. Foley, and C.R. Siviour, Mechanical properties of Epon 
826/DEA epoxy. Mechanics of Time-Dependent Materials, 2008. 12(3): p. 
249-272. 
15. Hou, J.P., C. Ruiz, and A. Trojanowski, Torsion tests of thermosetting resins at 
impact strain rate and under quasi-static loading. Materials Science and 
Engineering a-Structural Materials Properties Microstructure and Processing, 
2000. 283(1-2): p. 181-188. 
16. Miwa, M., et al., Strain-Rate and Temperature-Dependence of Shear 
Properties of Epoxy-Resin. Journal of Materials Science, 1995. 30(7): p. 1760-
1765. 
17. Gerlach, R., et al., Experimental characterisation and constitutive modelling 
of RTM-6 resin under impact loading. Polymer, 2008. 49(11): p. 2728-2737. 
18. Hogg, P.J., Perspectives - Composites in armor. Science, 2006. 314(5802): p. 
1100-1101. 
19. Zhou, Y.X., D.Z. Jiang, and Y.M. Xia, Tensile mechanical behavior of T300 and 
M40J fiber bundles at different strain rate. Journal of Materials Science, 2001. 
36(4): p. 919-922. 
- 171 - 
20. Zhou, Y.X., et al., Tensile behavior of carbon fiber bundles at different strain 
rates. Materials Letters, 2010. 64(3): p. 246-248. 
21. Yazici, M., Loading Rate Sensitivity of High Strength Fibers and Fiber/Matrix 
Interfaces. Journal of Reinforced Plastics and Composites, 2009. 28(15): p. 
1869-1880. 
22. Tanoglu, M., et al., A new technique to characterize the fiber/matrix 
interphase properties under high strain rates. Composites Part a-Applied 
Science and Manufacturing, 2000. 31(10): p. 1127-1138. 
23. Fishpool, D.T., et al., Preferential Energy Absorbing Interfaces for Ballistic and 
Structural Applications, in The 18th International Conference On Composite 
Materials2011: Jeju, South Korea. 
24. Vural, M. and G. Ravichandran, Transverse failure in thick S2-glass/epoxy 
fiber-reinforced composites. Journal Of Composite Materials, 2004. 38(7): p. 
609-623. 
25. Hosur, M.V., et al., High strain rate compression response of carbon/epoxy 
laminate composites. Composite Structures, 2001. 52(3-4): p. 405-417. 
26. Okoli, O.I. and G.F. Smith, Failure modes of fibre reinforced composites: The 
effects of strain rate and fibre content. Journal of Materials Science, 1998. 
33(22): p. 5415-5422. 
27. Jacob, G.C., et al., Strain rate effects on the mechanical properties of polymer 
composite materials. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 2004. 94(1): p. 296-
28. Sierakowski, R.L., Strain Rate Effects in Composites. Applied Mechanics 
Review, 1997. 50(12): p. 741-762. 
29. Zukas, J.A., et al., Impact Dynamics1982: John Wiley & Sons. 
30. Hamouda, A.M.S. and M.S.J. Hashmi, Testing of composite materials at high 
rates of strain: advances and challenges. Journal of Materials Processing 
Technology, 1998. 77(1-3): p. 327-336. 
31. Field, J.E., et al., Review of experimental techniques for high rate deformation 
and shock studies. International Journal of Impact Engineering, 2004. 30(7): 
p. 725-775. 
32. Lidgett, M., et al., Multi-Scale Modelling Of Polymer Composite Materials 
Under Blast and Ballistic Loading, in The 18th International Conference On 
Composite Materials2011: Jeju, South Korea. 
33. Cox, B. and Q.D. Yang, In quest of virtual tests for structural composites. 
Science, 2006. 314(5802): p. 1102-1107. 
34. Li, S.G., On the unit cell for micromechanical analysis of fibre-reinforced 
composites. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series a-
Mathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences, 1999. 455(1983): p. 815-
35. Li, S.G., Boundary conditions for unit cells from periodic microstructures and 
their implications. Composites Science and Technology, 2008. 68(9): p. 1962-
1974. 
36. Nye, J.F., Physical Properties of Crystals - Their Representation by Tensors and 
Matrices1957: Oxford University Press. 
37. Garnich, M.R. and V.M.K. Akula, Review of Degradation Models for 
Progressive Failure Analysis of Fiber Reinforced Polymer Composites. Applied 
Mechanics Reviews, 2009. 62(1). 
38. Zhao, L.G., N.A. Warrior, and A.C. Long, Finite element modelling of damage 
progression in non-crimp fabric reinforced composites. Composites Science 
and Technology, 2006. 66(1): p. 36-50. 
- 172 - 
39. Orifici, A.C., I. Herszberg, and R.S. Thomson, Review of methodologies for 
composite material modelling incorporating failure. Composite Structures, 
2008. 86(1-3): p. 194-210. 
40. Knight Jr, N.F., User-Defined Material Model for Progressive Failure Analysis. 
NASA STI Report Series, 2006. 
41. Schweizerhof, K., et al., Crashworthiness Analysis with Enhanced Composite 
Material Models in LS-DYNA - Merits and Limits, in LS-DYNA World 
Conference1998: Detroit, Michigan, USA. 
42. Matzenmiller, A., J. Lubliner, and R.L. Taylor, A Constitutive Model for 
Anisotropic Damage in Fiber-Composites. Mechanics of Materials, 1995. 
20(2): p. 125-152. 
43. Abaqus 6.9 Documentation, DS Simula, 2009. 
44. Yen, C., Ballistic impact modelling of composite materials, in 7th International 
LS-DYNA Users Conference2002: Dearborn, Michigan. 
45. Zheng, X.H. and W.K. Binienda, Rate-dependent shell element composite 
material model implementation in LS-DYNA. Journal of Aerospace 
Engineering, 2008. 21(3): p. 140-151. 
46. Goldberg, R.K., G.D. Roberts, and A. Gilat, Incorporation of mean stress 
effects into the micromechanical analysis of the high strain rate response of 
polymer matrix composites. Composites Part B-Engineering, 2003. 34(2): p. 
151-165. 
47. Daniel, I.M., B.T. Werner, and J.S. Fenner, Strain-rate-dependent failure 
criteria for composites. Composites Science and Technology, 2011. 71(3): p. 
357-364. 
48. Meyer, L.W. and M. Mayer, 'New Strain Rate Dependent Material Model for 
Fiber Reinforced Composites', in Tom Proulx (ed.), Time Dependent 
Constitutive Behavior and Fracture/Failure Processes, Vol. 3: Proceedings of 
the 2010 Annual Conference on Experimental and Applied Mechanics, 2011, 
Springer. p. 149-158. 
49. Cuntze, R.G., The FAILURE MODE CONCEPT - a new comprehensive 3D-
strength analysis concept for any brittle and ductile behaving material. 
European Conference on Spacecraft Structures, Materials and Mechanical 
Testing, Proceedings, 1999. 428: p. 269-287. 
50. Heimbs, S., et al., Crash Simulation of an F1 Racing Car Front Impact 
Structure, in 7th European LS-DYNA Conference2009: Salzburg, Austria. 
51. Ernst, G., et al., Multiscale progressive failure analysis of textile composites. 
Composites Science and Technology, 2010. 70(1): p. 61-72. 
52. Sun, C.T. and R.S. Vaidya, Prediction of composite properties, from a 
representative volume element. Composites Science and Technology, 1996. 
56(2): p. 171-179. 
53. Fiedler, B., et al., Failure behavior of an epoxy matrix under different kinds of 
static loading. Composites Science and Technology, 2001. 61(11): p. 1615-
1624. 
54. Lemaitre, J. and J.L. Chaboche, Mcanique des matriaux solides1988. 
55. Hillerborg, A., M. Modeer, and P.E. Petersson, Analysis of crack formation 
and crack growth in concrete by means of fracture mechanics and finite 
elements. Cement and Concrete Research, 1976. 6: p. 773-782. 
56. Vogler, M., G. Ernst, and R. Rolfes, Invariant Based Transversely-Isotropic 
Material and Failure Model for Fiber-Reinforced Polymers. Cmc-Computers 
Materials & Continua, 2010. 16(1): p. 25-49. 
- 173 - 
57. Juhasz, J., R. Rolfes, and K. Rohwer, A new strength model for application of a 
physically based failure criterion to orthogonal 3D fiber reinforced plastics. 
Composites Science and Technology, 2001. 61(13): p. 1821-1832. 
58. Puck, A. and H. Schurmann, Failure analysis of FRP laminates by means of 
physically based phenomenological models. Composites Science and 
Technology, 2002. 62(12-13): p. 1633-1662. 
59. Wang, X.F., et al., Multi-scale analyses of 3D woven composite based on 
periodicity boundary conditions. Journal Of Composite Materials, 2007. 
41(14): p. 1773-1788. 
60. Van Den Broucke, B., et al., Modelling of Damage in Textile Reinforced 
Composites: Micro-Meso Approach, in Symposium on Finite Element 
Modeling of Textiles and Textile Composites2007: St Petersburg, Russia. 
61. Katholieke Universiteit Leuven Website - WiseTex Suite Section. [cited 
25/11/11]; Availiable from: 
http://www.mtm.kuleuven.be/Onderzoek/Composites/software/wisetex. 
62. Okereke, M., et al., Virtual Testbed for Numerical Homogenization of Elastic 
Behaviour and Damage Initiation in Bidirectional Composites, in 5th European 
Congress on Computational Methods in Applied Sciences and 
Engineering2008: Venice, Italy. 
63. Zhang, B.M., et al., Hierarchical multiscale modeling of failure in 
unidirectional fiber-reinforced plastic matrix composite. Materials & Design, 
2010. 31(5): p. 2312-2318. 
64. Foreman, J.P., et al., Rate dependent multiscale modelling of fibre reinforced 
composites. Plastics Rubber and Composites, 2009. 38(2-4): p. 67-71. 
65. Grujicic, M., et al., Multi-scale ballistic material modeling of cross-plied 
compliant composites. Composites Part B-Engineering, 2009. 40(6): p. 468-
66. Iremonger, M.J., Polyethylene composites for protection against high velocity 
small arms bullets, in International Symposium on Ballistics1999: San 
Antonio. p. 946-953. 
67. Lua, J., W. Gregory, and J. Sankar, Multi-scale dynamic failure prediction tool 
for marine composite structures. Journal of Materials Science, 2006. 41(20): 
p. 6673-6692. 
68. Daniel, I.M., et al., Mechanical Behaviour and Failure Criteria of Composite 
Materials under Static and Dynamic Loading, in The 17th International 
Conference on Composite Materials2009: Edinburgh, UK. 
69. Fujita, Y., T. Kurashiki, and M. Zako, Study on the Transverse Strength of 
Unidirectional Composite, in The 14th European Conference on Composite 
Materials2010: Budapest, Hungary. 
70. Aminjikarai, S.B. and A. Tabiei, A strain-rate dependent 3-D micromechanical 
model for finite element simulations of plain weave composite structures. 
Composite Structures, 2007. 81(3): p. 407-418. 
71. Mishnaevsky, L. and P. Brondsted, Three-dimensional numerical modelling of 
damage initiation in unidirectional fiber-reinforced composites with ductile 
matrix. Materials Science and Engineering a-Structural Materials Properties 
Microstructure and Processing, 2008. 498(1-2): p. 81-86. 
72. Tursun, G., et al., The influence of transition phases on the damage behaviour 
of an Al/10vol.%SiC composite. Computational Materials Science, 2006. 37(1-
2): p. 119-133. 
73. ImageJ. Image Processing and Analysis in Java. [cited 05/10/11]; Availiable 
from: http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/. 
- 174 - 
74. Gommer, F., A. Endruweit, and A.C. Long, Non-Uniformity Of The Filament 
Distribution In Fibre Bundles And Its Effect On Defect Formation In Liquid 
Composite Moulding, in The 18th International Conference on Composite 
Materials2011: Jeju, South Korea. 
75. Li, S.G. and A. Wongsto, Unit cells for micromechanical analyses of particle-
reinforced composites. Mechanics of Materials, 2004. 36(7): p. 543-572. 
76. Lidgett, M., et al., Virtual modelling of microscopic damage in polymer 
composite materials at high rates of strain. Plastics Rubber and Composites, 
2011. 40(6-7): p. 324-332. 
77. Gutkin, R. and S.T. Pinho, Practical Application Of Failure Models To Predict 
The Response Of Composite Structures, in The 18th International Conference 
On Composite Materials2011: Jeju, South Korea. 
78. Maligno, A.R., Finite Element Investigations on the Microstructure of 
Composite Materials, in School of Mechanical, Materials and Manufacturing 
Engineering2007, The University of Nottingham: Nottingham. 
79. Soden, P.D., M.J. Hinton, and A.S. Kaddour, Lamina properties, lay-up 
configurations and loading conditions for a range of fibre-reinforced 
composite laminates. Composites Science and Technology, 1998. 58(7): p. 
1011-1022. 
80. Kari, S., et al., Effect Of Yarn Cross-Sectional Shapes And Crimp On The 
Mechanical Properties Of 3D Woven Composites, in The 17th International 
Conference On Composite Materials2009: Edinburgh, UK. 
81. Wright, A. and M. French, The response of carbon fibre composites to blast 
loading via the Europa CAFV programme. Journal of Materials Science, 2008. 
43(20): p. 6619-6629. 
82. Permali Gloucester Limited Website. [cited 06/03/12]; Availiable from: 
http://www.permali.co.uk/. 
83. Sigmatex Company Website. [cited 24/04/12]; Availiable from: 
http://www.sigmatex.com/Home. 
84. Matrix Composite Materials Company Website. [cited 24/04/12]; Availiable 
from: http://www.sicomin.co.uk/. 
85. Imetrum Company Website. [cited 24/04/12]; Availiable from: 
http://www.imetrum.com/. 
86. ASTM-D3039, Standard Test Method for Tensile Properties of Polymer Matrix 
Composite Materials. ASTM International, 1995. 
87. ASTM-D3518, Standard Test Method for In-Plane Shear Response of Polymer 
Matrix Composite Materials by Tensile Test of a 45 Laminate. ASTM 
International, 1995. 
88. Kistler Company Website. [cited 24/04/12]; Availiable from: 
http://www.kistler.com. 
89. FLYDE Company Website. [cited 24/04/12]; Availiable from: 
http://www.fylde.com/. 
90. Data Translation Company Website. [cited 24/04/12]; Availiable from: 
http://www.datatranslation.com/. 
91. Zhao, F.M. and N. Takeda, Effect of interfacial adhesion and statistical fiber 
strength on tensile strength of unidirectional glass fiber/epoxy composites. 
Part I: experiment results. Composites Part a-Applied Science and 
Manufacturing, 2000. 31(11): p. 1203-1214. 
92. Ghiorse, S.R., Effect of Void Content on the Mechanical-Properties of Carbon 
Epoxy Laminates. Sampe Quarterly-Society for the Advancement of Material 
and Process Engineering, 1993. 24(2): p. 54-59. 
- 175 - 
93. Vallons, K., et al., Fibre Orientation Effects On The Tensile Properties Of 
Biaxial Carbon/Epoxy NCF Composites, in The 17th International Conference 
on Composite Materials2009: Edinburgh, UK. 
- 176 - 
Appendix A Publications 
Lidgett, M., Brooks, R., Warrior, N.A., Brown, K.  Virtual Modelling of 
Microscopic Damage in Polymer Composite Materials at High Rates of 
Strain. Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Composite 
Materials (ECCM). 2010. Budapest, Hungary. 
Brooks, R., Lidgett, M., Warrior, N.A., Brown, K.  Multi-Scale Modelling of 
Damage in Textile Composite Materials at High Rates of Strain. Proceedings 
of the 10th International Conference on Textile Composites (TEXCOMP). 
2010. Lille, France. 
Lidgett, M., Brooks, R., Warrior, N.A., Brown, K.  Virtual Modelling of 
Microscopic Damage in Polymer Composite Materials at High Rates of 
Strain. Plastics, Rubber and Composites. 2011. 40. p. 324-332. 
Lidgett, M., Brooks, R., Warrior, N.A., Brown, K., Martindale, N., Wright, 
A., French, M.  Multi-Scale Modelling of Polymer Composite Materials under 
Blast and Ballistic Loading. Proceedings of the 18th International 
Conference on Composite Materials (ICCM). 2011. Jeju, South Korea. 
Wright, A., French, M., Lidgett, M., Brooks, R. Foxhound: the UKs latest 
composite armoured vehicle.  Proceedings of the SAMPE EUROPE 33
International Technical Conference. 2012. Paris, France. 
- 177 - 
Appendix B Material Properties 
- 178 - 
Appendix C Micro Scale Strain Rate Scaling 
Plots 
Carbon/Epoxy 
- 179 - 
Stiffness Strain Rate 
Scaling Constant 
Strength Strain Rate 
Scaling Constant 
Transverse X Tension 0.0776 0.1802 
Transverse X Compression 0.0774 0.1898 
Transverse Y Tension 0.0822 0.1690 
Transverse Y Compression 0.0823 0.1763 
Longitudinal Z Tension 0.0005 -0.0045 
Longitudinal Z Compression 0.0005 0.0005 
Transverse XY Shear 0.1169 0.1842 
Longitudinal XZ Shear 0.1172 0.1044 
- 180 - 
S2 Glass/Epoxy 
- 181 - 
Stiffness Strain Rate 
Scaling Constant 
Strength Strain Rate 
Scaling Constant 
Transverse X Tension 0.1657 0.1867 
Transverse X Compression 0.1654 0.1902 
Transverse Y Tension 0.1498 0.1827 
Transverse Y Compression 0.1446 0.1848 
Longitudinal Z Tension 0.0022 0.0126 
Longitudinal Z Compression 0.0027 0.0013 
Transverse XY Shear 0.1599 0.1935 
Longitudinal XZ Shear 0.1315 0.1593 
- 182 - 
Appendix D Meso Scale Strain Rate Scaling 
Plots 
Carbon/Epoxy 
- 183 - 
Stiffness Strain Rate 
Scaling Constant 
Strength Strain Rate 
Scaling Constant 
In-Plane X Tension 0.0022 0.1372 
In-Plane X Compression 0.0054 0.1524 
Through Thickness Y Tension 0.1059 0.1277 
Through Thickness Y Compression 0.1027 0.1295 
Through Thickness XY Shear 0.1318 0.1943 
In-Plane XZ Shear 0.1283 0.1383 
S2 Glass/Epoxy 
- 184 - 
Stiffness Strain Rate 
Scaling Constant 
Strength Strain Rate 
Scaling Constant 
In-Plane X Tension -0.0010 0.0958 
In-Plane X Compression 0.0037 0.0551 
Through Thickness Y Tension 0.1313 0.1339 
Through Thickness Y Compression 0.1371 0.1398 
Through Thickness XY Shear 0.1369 0.1605 
In-Plane XZ Shear 0.1389 0.1318 
	Abstract
	Acknowledgements
	Abbreviations and Notations
	1 Introduction
	1.1 Background
	1.2 Objectives and Scope
	1.3 Thesis Layout
	2  Literature Review
	2.1 Introduction
	2.2 Composite Materials
	2.2.1 Characteristics of Polymer Composite Materials
	2.2.2 Elastic Deformation of Polymer Composite Materials
	2.2.3 Damage and Failure of Polymer Composite Materials
	2.2.4 Strain Rate Dependence of Polymer Composite Materials
	2.3 Experimental Characterisation of Composite Material Properties
	2.4 Multi-Scale Modelling Characterisation of Composite Material Properties
	2.4.1 Unit Cell Modelling
	2.4.2 Finite Element Method
	2.4.3 Constitutive Models
	2.4.4 Damage Initiation Modelling
	2.4.5 Damage Evolution Modelling
	2.4.6 Strain Rate Dependent Modelling
	2.4.7 Multi-Scale Modelling
	2.5 Conclusions
	3 Modelling Methodology
	3.1 Introduction
	3.2 Unit Cell Definitions and Generation
	3.2.1 Micro Scale Unit Cell
	3.2.2 Meso Scale Unit Cell
	3.3 Boundary Conditions
	3.4 Material Models
	3.4.1 Matrix Material Model
	3.4.2 Fibre Material Model
	3.4.3 Interface Material Model
	3.4.4 Yarn Material Model
	3.5 Implementation in Abaqus
	4 Micro Scale Modelling
	4.1 Introduction
	4.2 Micro Scale Micrograph Analyses
	4.2.1 Fibre Diameter Study
	4.2.2 Fibre Volume Fraction Study
	4.3 Micro Scale Modelling Studies
	4.3.1 Mesh Sensitivity Study
	4.3.2 Mass Scaling Study
	4.3.3 Fibre Strength Study
	4.3.4 Interface Strength Study
	4.3.5 Interface Thickness Study
	4.3.6 Damage Evolution Study
	4.3.7 Transverse Tension Study
	4.4 Micro Scale Modelling Results
	4.4.1 Carbon/Epoxy
	4.4.2 S2 Glass/Epoxy
	4.5 Micro Scale Modelling Discussion
	4.5.1 Elastic and Damage Response
	4.5.2 Strain Rate Dependent Response
	4.5.3 Carbon and S2 Glass Comparison
	4.5.4 Analytical Results Comparison
	4.6 Micro to Meso Scale
	5 Meso Scale Modelling
	5.1 Introduction
	5.2 Meso Scale Micrograph Analysis
	5.2.1 Yarn Dimension Study
	5.3 Meso Scale Modelling Studies
	5.3.1 Mesh Sensitivity Study
	5.3.2 Mass Scaling Study
	5.3.3 Strain Time Loading Study
	5.3.4 Yarn Shape Sensitivity Study
	5.3.5 In-Plane Loading Study
	5.4 Meso Scale Modelling Results
	5.4.1 Carbon/Epoxy
	5.4.2 S2 Glass/Epoxy
	5.5 Meso Scale Modelling Discussion
	5.5.1 Elastic and Damage Response
	5.5.2 Strain Rate Dependent Response
	5.6 Meso to Macro Scale
	5.7 Macro Scale Modelling Case Studies
	5.7.1 Blast Panel Case Study
	5.7.2 Ballistic Panel Case Study
	6 Experimental Testing
	6.1 Introduction
	6.2 Methodology
	6.2.1 Manufacturing Process
	6.2.2 Quasi-Static Testing
	6.2.3 Intermediate Strain Rate Testing
	6.3 Experimental Results
	6.3.1 Quasi Static Results
	6.3.2 Intermediate Strain Rate Results
	6.4 Discussion
	6.4.1 Quasi Static Results
	6.4.2 Intermediate Strain Rate Results
	7 Conclusions and Recommendations
	7.1 Introduction
	7.2 Discussion
	7.3 Conclusions
	7.4 Recommendations for Future Work
	References
	Appendix A Publications
	Appendix B Material Properties
	Appendix C Micro Scale Strain Rate Scaling Plots
	Appendix D Meso Scale Strain Rate Scaling Plots
