Microsoft Word - WRAP_THESIS_coversheet
University of Warwick institutional repository: http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap
A Thesis Submitted for the Degree of PhD at the University of Warwick
http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap/34722
This thesis is made available online and is protected by original copyright.
Please scroll down to view the document itself.
Please refer to the repository record for this item for information to help you to
cite it. Our policy information is available from the repository home page.
Grotesque and Excremental Humour:
Monty Python's Meaning of Life.
Volume I of 3 Volumes
Janis Udris M.Sc MA
Submitted for the degree of Ph.D
University of Warwick
Department of Film Studies
December 1988
GROTESQUE AND EXCREMENTAL HUMOUR: MONTY PYTHON'S MEANING OF LIFE.
- Introduction 	 	 1
- Section 1. Sources of attitudes to the grotesque and to the
excremental 	 	 4
1.1 The grotesque
1.2 Excrement and manners
1.3 Is grotesque realism dead?
1.4 Psychoanalysis and the excremental
1.5 Language, excrement and power
- Section 2. The comedic: return of the repressed 	  61
2.1 Defining terms, looking ahead
2.2 Social, ideological and psychoanalytic
functions of the comedic
2.3 Obscene/excremental and grotesque
comedicity
2.4 Film/TV
- Section 3. Terry Gilliam: domestication of the grotesque. . 158
- Section 4. Psychosociological models and methodologies:
preparation for audience research 	  170
4.1 Measurement
4.2 The research
4.3 Problems
- Section 5. The development of a methodology for a study of
a Meaning of Life audience 	  232
- Section 6. The research: watching and talking about Monty
Python's Meaning of Life 	  261
6.1 Introduction to the section
6.2 Preparation
6.3 Procedure
6.4 Modes of analysis
6.5 Analysis of tape transcripts
6.6 The Humour Appreciation Test
6.7 The Mood Adjective Check Lists
- Conclusion 	  411
- References 	  416
- Bibliography 	  471
- Appendices. These constitute the separate vol.III.
Appendix 1 Questionnaire
2 Humour Appreciation Test
3 Mood Adjective Checklist
4 Transcript of taped discussions
Tables and Figures
Fig.1 Koestler's Bisociation Model	 69
Fig.2 Diagrammatic representation of the relationship
between repression and amusement predicted by Freud's
theory	 189
Fig.3 Strength of repression of drive related to tendentious
comedic element	 190
Fig.4 Relation of reported funniness to absurdity, based on
Ertel's findings 	 192
Fig.5 Audience's reaction to the form and content of
derisive jokes	 219
Fig.6 Respondents taking part in each stage of the research
project	 271
Fig.7 Some cultural-capital indicators for respondents
taking part in screenings/interviews 	 287-288
Fig.8 Total number of ticks awarded for each Monty Python
amusement factor listed in Questionnaire item no.36 by
those respondents who did not place factors in rank
order	 389
Fig.9 Modified preference scores for those respondents who
placed some or all listed factors in order of
preference	 389
Fig.10 Summary of Humour Ratings Sheet responses	 390
Fig.11 Mood Adjective Check List summary sheet	 399-401
Fig.12 Net MACL unit change for each word 	 402
Fig.13 MACL shifts for 32 selected words	 403
Acknowledgements
This thesis would have been impossible to complete without the
various forms of help and support of the following:
Richard Dyer
Raynalle Udris
the staff at the British Library, Great Russell St.
London
the staff at Sir James Altham School, Watford
students of the 1986/87 1st year of the University of
London Extra-Mural Department's Diploma in Film Studies
and sundry Monty Python enthusiasts.
SUMMARY OF THE THESIS 
The thesis represents an attempt to bring together theoretical
and empirical work on (grotesque/excremental) humour. The first two
sections are consequently concerned with the history and theoris-
ation of the grotesque/excremental and with the prevalent ways of
analysing the comedic. It was decided that a 'history' of Monty
Python would constitute too long a digression, and so only a brief
account of Terry Gilliam's links with the grotesque is included.
Two further section then deal with some of the research on the
comedic which has been done and with audience research methodol-
ogies. It is worth noting a shift which took place in the course of
work on this thesis, from a concern with highly individuated
responses (reflecting the centrality of psychoanalytic explications
of the comedic) to an eventual decision to concentrate on a 'reader-
response' approach. The rationale for this shift is discussed in
Section 5, and briefly in Section 6.
The empirical heart of the research is, then, an analysis of a
transcript of six hours of taped interviews/discussions about
responses to Monty Python's Meaning of Life. These are supplemented
by the results of Humour Appreciation Tests and Mood Adjective Check
Lists administered under standard conditions to the respondents
watching the film.
While there can be no question of 'proof', particularly in a
field in which psychoanalytic mechanisms are arguably crucial,
results of the empirical study indicate that the humour of Meaning
of Life functions to reduce anxiety, and that the mechanism by which
this occurs conforms to a Freudian repression model. Over and above
this, however, - the work of David Morley and Janice Radway is worth
evoking here - the detailed account of audience response also furn-
ishes data for further enquiry about how and why 'real' respondents
do or do not find grotesque and excremental humour 'funny'.
Introduction.
"Humour (is) the most exquisitely dull and stupefyingly unin-
teresting topic known to man, the Law of Real Property not
excepted ..." - John Cleesel
The idea for this research was informed by at least two areas of
interest: first the work which I had done on the comedic for an MA
dissertation, 2 and, second, an interest in the popularity of Monty
Python. These two were then linked by a concern for historical
specificity and some degree of analytical rigour, products of a
scientific training and of the kind of original-source research
encouraged at the Polytechnic of London.
Whilst the Monty Python films (particularly Meaning of Life,
1983) and the ways in which they function remain of focal interest,
I have found myself drawn into a study of the history of manners, of
attitudes to the 'unclean', and of the origins of and developments
in notions of the grotesque; this historical/theoretical material
will constitute the first section of this thesis.
The second section will be concerned with theories of comedy/
humour/pleasure, and particularly with excremental and other 'taboo'
areas. At this point a first central problematic will be intro-
duced, that of the l immanence 13 or otherwise of comedicity. It will
emerge that humour/funniness can only be discovered through a
reading subject's negotiation of potentially comedic elements in a
text; yet this will only beg the (even bigger) question of how such
negotiation is effected. The axiomatic term here will be the
unconscious, in relation both to the individual topography of
symbolisation, repression, sublimation etc. and to the maintenance
of social-subject positioning through various ideological oper-
ations. While this will enable us to theorise the effectivity of
humour and other pleasures with a fair degree of coherence, the
notion of the unconscious can already alert us to the difficulties
which will accompany our empirical project. We shall be examining
the interface of the articulable and the inarticulable, and the
problem is going to be: can we gain access to the inarticulable?
Short of psychoanalysing the respondents in the empirical project,
what can we learn about what they cannot articulate?
The parenthetical and severely curtailed third section will look
very briefly at the influence of Terry Gilliam's animation style on
the development of a grotesque/excremental strand in the comedic ity
of Monty Python.
In the fourth and fifth sections we shall be moving towards a
methodology for some empirical research on a Meaning of Life
audience. First we shall review some of the more self-consciously
'scientific' experimental/empirical work which has been done on
sexual, aggressive and absurd humour and make some comments about
the appropriateness or otherwise of the approaches used. We shall
then turn to some audience research based on interview methods, and
consider the reader-response model developed by Janice Radway4 for
studying the readers of romance novels.
Finally, in the sixth and most voluminous section, we shall
elucidate and activate our own audience research model. This will
turn out to be primarily interview-based, but with some additional
quantifying 'gadgets' drawn from the research literature. As in the
work published by David Morley, 5 the emphasis will be on a descrip-
tive account of viewers' responses, heuristically organized under a
number of categories. While this will clearly represent a ceding of
primacy to the articulable, an occasional symptomatic reading may
nevertheless be possible with regard to that which cannot be articu-
lated. In addition to this, and in the final pages of the section,
the data from the more 'scientific' gadgets will enable us to make
some pertinent, and perhaps less speculative, comments about the
inarticulable in relation to Freudian notions of repression.
Given the nature of the quarry, then - the unconscious mecha-
nisms by which particular respondents negotiate the comedic in
general and Monty Python's Meaning of Life in particular -, there
can be no question of 'proof' here. It will rather be a matter of
making a modest addition to an understanding first of how certain
kinds of comedic elements can be seen to be negotiated in particular
instances, and, second, of what kinds of psychoanalytic and ideolog-
ical functions such comedicity can fulfil.
Sources of attitudes to the grotesque and the excremental.
"There is no way out of the game of culture; and one's only
chance of objectifying the true nature of the game is to
objectify as fully as possible the very operations which one
is obliged to use in order to achieve that objectifica-
tion."1
By way of introduction to this section, here are one or two
further self-reflective remarks, particularly in relation to the
specific subject-matter.
A number of potential obstacles to this kind of exercise are of
interest. First, there is a degree of transgression on a personal
level. If "dirt" is, as Mary Douglas puts it,
"... an omnibus compendium which includes all the rejected
elements of ordered systems"
then "in focusing on it we run against our strongest mental
habit."2
Douglas also refers to Jean-Paul Sartre's identification of the
threat posed by stickiness/viscosity to the security of the solid/
liquid dichotomy, 3 an idea which opens up a whole can of psychoana-
lytic considerations. Rather than myself undergo analysis here, I
shall leave a discussion of some psychoanalytic aspects of excrement
until a later subsection.
A second difficulty relates to the social: how to escape an air
of pedantry when dealing with the excremental? Some of the material
which I have used and shall refer to is in French, and the use of
the words 'merde', 'stercus', 'ordure' etc. thus acquires an esot-
eric justification (apart from the relatively low shock-value
possessed by 'merde' anyway, a fact the relevance of which should
emerge below). In my use of English, I shall use the work 'shit'
rather than the overly pedantic 'faeces' or some other euphemism,
'excrement' being a more general term covering a variety of
effluvia. In 'respectable' written form this will probably pass,
but in answering casual questions like "What are you working on?" a
quick assessment of the social context is crucial
The problem of social attitudes to the study of, or indeed the
mention of, the unclean has another aspect, linked to signification.
Barthes wrote that
"... crite, la merde ne sent pas. A
We shall observe below the links between the 'cleansing' of language
and the (impulse towards) the physical cleaning of a filthy Paris;
here we note that one function of a word is to conceal that which it
represents (whether the 'pure' signified can ever be apprehended is
another matter, but ...).
"... Plutarch defends with many reasons, in ... 'Svmposeons',
that where the matters themselves are often unpleasant to
behold, their counterfeits are seen not without delecta-
tion."5
"Si nous disons ordure, ce nom est beaucoup plus noble que la
chose signifige ... car nous aimons mieux l'entendre que la
sentir."
Dominique Laporte 7 observes that whilst St. Augustine was satisfied
with an evident hierarchy from the ordure/shit itself (more 'know-
able') to the word for ordure/shit (less 'knowable' but to be
preferred for that reason); Freud abolishes the distinction and
maintains that the word is (was in his day) as taboo as the thing.
"quiconque gtudie de telles choses se voit consid grg- come a
peine moms 'inconvenant' que celui qui fait r gellement des
choses inconvenantes."8
Even if this is not quite 'true' in social practice, it does
remind me of the scientist researching selenium compounds who didn't
have any friends ... It is worth noting at this point that contem-
porary attitudes to the excremental and the grotesque will be
important in looking at audience reactions to The Meaning of Life.
The subsections which follow will, one hopes, bring us nearer to an
understanding of the grotesque/excremental in our contemporary
culture.
1.1 The grotesque
Writing on the grotesque has been marked by its diversity but
also by its bias towards literary formulations; typical debates
concern the grotesqueness of characters in works by Sterne, Swift,
Dickens, Baudelaire, Gogol. A good summary of the main 'theories'
concerned with the grotesque is given by Michael Steig. 9 The
picture which emerges through the work of Wolfgang Kayser, Arthur
Clayborough, John Ruskin, Lee Byron Jennings, Lewis Lawson and
Norman Holland is of the gradual development of more sophisticated
formulations of the grotesque as occupying a position somewhere
between the uncanny/frightening and the laughable, in Ruskin's words
"a combination of the fearful and the ludicrous".
In Steig's words:
"The grotesque involves the managing of the uncanny by the
comic.
When the infantile material is primarily threatening, comic
techniques, including caricature, diminish the threat
through degradation or ridicule; but at the same time they
may also enhance anxiety through their aggressive implica-
tions and the strangeness they lend the threatening figure.
In the 'comic-grotesque', the comic in its various forms
lessens the threat of identification with infantile drives
by means of ridicule; at the same time, it lulls inhibitions
and makes possible on a preconscious level the same identi-
fication that it appears to the conscious/superego to pre-
vent." 1 (original emphasis)
Whilst such a definition of the grotesque may be fruitful in nar-
rowly text-based studies of, say, Dickens or Kafka, it is not a very
satisfying starting-point for a study of the imagery of
"... a landscape littered with the usual Pythonesque rubbish
of severed limbs, squashed animals, unspeakable victuals and
grisly instruments."11
While not denying the operation of unconscious defence mecha-
nisms in both the construction and the consumption of such grotesque
images, one is driven to ask what the cultural/historical determi-
nants could be for such a choice of images/preoccupations (more of
Terry Gilliam later). Some clues which may be worth following are
given by Mikhail Bakhtin.
The notions developed by Bakhtin in discussing Rabelaisian
literature which are important here are those of the "material
bodily principle" and of "grotesque realism". Bakhtin is at pains
to stress that much of the mediaeval literature (and in particular
that of Rabelais) which uses gross images of excessive physicality
has been misinterpreted:
"... according to the narrow and modified meaning which mod-
ern ideology, especially that of the 19th century, attrib-
uted to 'materiality' and 'the body'.12
"In grotesque realism ... the bodily element is deeply posi-
tive. ... The body and bodily life have here a cosmic and
at the same time an all-people's character; this is not the
body and its physiology in the modern sense of these words,
because it is not individualized. The material bodily prin-
ciple is contained not in the biological individual, not in
the bourgeois ego, but in the people, a people who are
continually growing and renewed. This is why all the body
becomes grandiose, exaggerated, immeasurable.n13
The remarks about individualized physiology and the bourgeois
ego are significant and will occupy us below; first let us look
again at what is meant by this "grotesque realism".
One aspect of grotesque realism was the transfer of all that was
spiritual/ideal/abstract to an earthly/bodily sphere:
"The people's laughter which characterized all the forms of
grotesque realism from immemorial times was linked with the
bodily lower stratum. Laughter degrades and materia-
lises."14
(Note in passing one of Henri Bergson's characteristics of the
comedic: materialisation/mechanisation of the human - "the mechani-
cal encrusted upon the living" -, as when a body such as Buster
Keaton's seems to go out of control. It is a mark of Bergson's
'Christian humanism' that he would not have included Bakhtin's
'degradation' under his definition of the laughable) (cf. pg.68
below).
Degradation in this case
"... relates to acts of defecation and copulation, concep-
tion, pregnancy and birth ... degradation digs a bodily
grave for a new birth; it has not only a destructive, nega-
tive aspect, but also a regenerative one."15
The regenerative principle is also extended to death: in death there
is the potential for new life; it is a matter of "a pregnant death,
a death that gives birth. 16
The second, more specific component of grotesque realism is the
"grotesque body", a body in contact with the cosmos, with a stress
on those parts open, to communication with the outside world: the
mouth, anus, hands, feet, breasts, nose. It is through these points
of contact with the cosmos that
"the body discloses its essence as a principle of growth
which exceeds its own limits only in copulation, pregnancy,
childbirth, the throes of death, eating, drinking and defe-
cation."17
This cosmic transcendence of the atomistic body is, incidentally,
noted by Pierre Bonaffg in the more modern psychoanalytic context:
"There is indeed a fragmenting of the body, but not at all
with a feeling of loss or degradation. Quite to the con-
trary, as much for the holder as for the others, the body is
fragmented by multiplication: the others no longer have to
do with a simple person, but with a man to the x+v+z power 
whose life has been immeasurable increased, dispersed while
being united with other natural forces ..., since its
existence no longer rests at the centre of its person, but
has hidden itself in several far-off and impregnable loca-
tions." 18 (original emphasis)
Visual expressions of the kind of body described by Bakhtin included
frescoes and bas-reliefs of 12th and 13th century churches and
cathedrals, and the paintings of Bosch and Breughel. In view of
Terry Gilliam's evident (conscious) appropriation of some of the
imagery of these painters, such a notion of the grotesque body -"you
can go into magnificent churches and find carvings of people doing
really gross things" 18 - is obviously relevant. Gilliam's anima-
tions frequently favour exaggerated excrescences, long noses,
sprouting limbs-as-branches, enormous spots/blemishes, all-devouring
mouths, and this list is very close to that furnished by Bakhtin in
his description of the features of the grotesque body. 20
"... the essential role belongs to those parts of the gro-
tesque body in which it outgrows its own self, transgressing
its own body, in which it conceives a new, second body; the
bowels and the phallus."21
Thus the grotesque body was defined by those features (especially
the nose/phallus, the bowels, the mouth), which could take on a
degree of independent existence and transgress the boundaries
separating the inside and the outside of the body, and which could
express the regenerative, fundamentally erotic aspects of humanity.
Bodily secretions such as vomiting, urine and shit were also
positive, regenerative substances:
"We must not forget that urine (as well as dung) is gay
matter, which degrades and relieves at the same time, trans-
forming fear into laughter ... If dung is a link between
body and earth (the laughter that unites them), urine is a
link between body and sea."22
In some ways they perhaps still are.
"Children of both sexes regard urine in its positive aspect
as equivalent to their mother's milk, in accordance with the
unconscious, which equates all bodily substances with one
another. ,, 23
Rabelais' literature is particularly rich in celebrations of exces-
sive eating and drinking, vomiting, prodigious floods of urine, etc.
Again the imagery of, say, the peasant sequence at the start of
Monty Python and the Holy Grail or the Fishfingers' evening meal in
Jabberwocky is striking in this respect. The Meaning of Life also
contains some instances of such latter-day grotesque realism; those
relating most explicitly to the digestive functions would include
the Meyer family's diet of suet, lard, fish-oil, butter-fat, drip-
ping and wool-grease in the Martin Luther section (missing from some
versions of the film) and, notoriously, the exploding Mr. Creosote
of the central 'Autumn Years' section.
In this 'grotesque' conception of the body, the spiritual centre
was to be located in the "material bodily lower stratum", in con-
trast to other (mostly subsequent) relocations of essence in the
heart, in the brain, or at some other point in the head (e.g. the
- 10 -
pineal body just above the nose in the case of some Hindu sects;
this point was also favoured by Descartes ...). The 'Untermensch'
corresponding to this valoriation of the upper stratum can then be
seen as a despised throwback to the mediaeval grotesque:
"A subhuman is a human of the nether regions, a person who is
human even below. Men of the Right are human only on top;
it is impossible to be a human being below. 24
Thus, in Bakhtin's view, much of the scatological material in
Rabelais' work (Garguantua's experiments in arse-wiping, Panta-
gruel's descent into the underworld) was a deliberate celebration of
the primacy of the material bodily lower stratum over the Catho-
lic/academic 'orthodoxy' of the day:
"The material bodily lower stratum ... liberates objects from
the snares of false consciousness, from illusions and subli-
mations inspired by fear."25
It is going to be necessary, in any thorough-going study of
audience-response to the grotesque/excremental in Monty Python
films, to operate some notion of social or class positioning of the
spectator. Some understanding of the class nature of the differen-
tial developments in the grotesque as outlined by Bakhtin is there-
fore also necessary. This is a difficult area in which my compe-
tence is slight, but it is worth some speculative work at this early
stage.
The assumption underlying Bakhtin's formulation of the mediaeval
grotesque is that it was a popular phenomenon, manifested most
commonly in the folk culture of ritual spectacle, parodic verbal
compositions, elaborate curses and oaths; these elements were in
turn to be found most frequently in the various carnivals, festivals
and saturnalia26 which followed the church calendar but which were
systematically placed outside the church and religiosity. In
keeping with the above grotesque notion of regeneration,
"Carnival was the true feast of time, the feast of becoming,
change and renewal ... hostile to all that was immortalized
and completed. 27
It is not clear whether Bakhtin's carnival could ever define itself
outside official prescription. For Terry Eagleton,
"Carnival, after all, is a licensed affair in every sense, a
permissible rupture in hegemony, a contained popular blow-
off as disturbing and relatively ineffectual as a revolu-
tionary work of art. As Shakespeare's Olivia remarks, there
is no slander in an allowed fool." 28 (original emphasis)
Prefiguring the observation, in Section 2 on comedy, on the rarity
(impossibility?) of humour/comedy fulfilling an entirely opposi-
tional function in conflict with dominant ideologies, Eagleton goes
"Carnival laughter is incorporative as well as liberating,
the lifting of inhibitions politically enervating as well as
disruptive. Indeed from one viewpoint carnival may figure
as a prime example of that mutual complicity of law and lib-
eration, power and desire, that has become a dominant theme
of contemporary post-Marxist pessimism. Bakhtin's carnival
... is so clearly a licensed enclave ..."28
My own reading of Bakhtin does not discern such a clear dependency
for carnival on official licence. It seems more likely that
"... for Bakhtin carnival ... was characterised by the inver-
sion not just of everyday rules and behaviour, but of the
dominant symbolic order ... a festival of discrowning in
which the axial signifiers of mediaeval ideology were scan-
dalously and often scatologically debased, tumbled down from
heaven to earth, trampled over and sullied by the heavy
material feet of the people's practice ..."3u
Included in an excellent (and meticulously detailed) account of
the (French) social history of smell and excrement by Alain Corbin
is a description of carnivalesque 'revolt' which catches well the
celebratory use of ordure. The coda, however, does maintain the
reservation expressed by Eagleton.
- 12 -
"While aristocrats continued for some time to show relative
indifference to the injunction ... of good conduct, the
masses were set on publicly displaying their allegiance to
filth. They proclaimed their prejudice in favour of degra-
dation as opposed to sublimation, which was the aim of the
bourgeoisie. Some scatological practices - such as throwing
excrement and waste, which was a feature of Shrovetide
battles, or farting audibly, sometimes with accompanying
gestures - revealed the masses' desire to let off steam ...;
unless these excesses were only temporary outlets, allowed
as a concession by the disciplinary process in order to
secure its own efficacy."31
The crucial 'event' which, it seems to me, exerted a determining
influence on notions of the body (both grotesque and non-grotesque)
- and, as we shall see in a later section, on attitudes to the
excremental -, was the gradual development of capitalism in Western
Europe. 32 As Richard Dyer points out,
"The rhetoric of capitalism insists that it is capital that
makes things happen; capital has the magic property of grow-
ing, stimulating. What this conceals is the fact that it is
human labour and, in the last instance, the labour of the
body, that makes things happen ... Much of the cultural
history of the past few centuries has been concerned with
ways of making sense of the body, while disguising the fact
that its predominant use has been as the labour of the
majority in the interests of the few."33
It will no doubt be necessary to return to this at some point, but
the aspects of capitalist development which are of interest here are
alienation and the constitution of the subject as an atomised
individual.
A pre-capitalist society would have been characterised by a
relatively close link between the producer of a certain article and
the community in which that article would be used:
"... this kind of society endowed all human activities with a
large degree of unity, harmony and stability. 3O
Although some capitalist relations already existed in the time of
which Bakhtin writes (14th-16th centuries), links between production
- 13 -
and communal life had not yet been severed, and it is certainly
feasible to see the grotesque regenerative body, non-individuated
and at one with the cosmos, as an expression of this communality.
By contrast,
'Modern alienation originates basically in the cleavage
between the producer and his product, resulting both from
the division of labour and commodity production."35
This physical cleavage of the producer from what he/she produces and
from the community is accompanied by a different structuring of the
way each person sees her/himself as an individual. Whereas pre-
viously the individual body was (at least in its grotesque, carni-
valesque aspects) hardly to be differentiated from the surroundings
(hence the exaggerated growth of features such as noses and penises,
which could communicate with the cosmos), the 'modern' body is
separate, atomised, entirely individuated. This in turn is not
accidental but is the product of the different forms taken by the
imaginary relation enjoyed by individual subject in relation to the
social totality. 36 The individuated subject who lives his/her
experience as a self-constituting entity is a necessary consequence
of a capitalist system of social relations, necessary also in the
sense that capitalism 'needs' individuals who will accept their
alienation and who, if they do sense its existence, will shrug their
shoulders and say "That's Life".
If we return to Bakhtin, we find that he has, indeed, identified
this shift in the representation of the human body. For him,
Renaissance literature saw the first widespread splitting of the
private body from the 'universal body', with the positive regenera-
tive aspects of the grotesque also diminishing:
- 14 -
"Two types of imagery reflecting the conception of the world
here meet at crossroads; one of them ascends to the folk
culture of humour, while the other is the bourgeois concep-
tion of the completed atomised being. The ever-growing,
inexhaustible, ever-laughing principle which uncrowns and
renews is combined with its opposite: the petty, inert
'material principle' of class society."37
Thus the Renaissance saw the development of canons according to
which grotesque realism was "hideous and formless". Bakhtin goes on
to discuss the development of the individual-grotesque and the
Romantic grotesque in the lath and 19th centuries, which saw a
decline in visual representations of the grotesque, the transposing
of the carnival spirit to a subjective idealist philosophy, the
constipation of laughter into irony and sarcasm. Finally (and the
Michael Steig summary (pg.7 above) becomes interesting here) this
period saw the development of the terror dimension of the grotesque
at the expense of any remaining bodily excesses:
"Images of bodily life, such as eating, drinking, copulation,
defecation, almost entirely lost their regenerative power
and were turned into vulgarities."38
The most recent developments in the grotesque discussed by
Bakhtin are an 'existential' grotesque (e.g. Jarry) which can be
traced back to the Romantic tradition, and the 'realist grotesque'
in which, interestingly, there has been some reappropriation (by
Mann and Brecht among others) of elements of folk culture and
carnival. These transformations have been complex, and a fuller
understanding of their origins would involve a
"... political somatics, a study of the political-libidinal
production of the historic body that attends not only, in
negative fashion, to its past and present imprintings, but
which may learn from such sources as Bakhtin something of
its revolutionary potential."39
Remembering the origins of notions of individuality in the ideologi,
cal forms engendered by particular socioeconomic formations
- 15 -
(cf. footnote 34 above), the signifying body, like the family, seems
to occupy an 'absent space' between base and superstructure; its
positions in relation to historical determinants and to its own
effectivity are consequently the more difficult to get to grips
with.
Let us, then, note some of the characteristics of the non-
grotesque 'modern' body. The genitals, mouth and anus are relegated
to a minor role, corresponding to the observed decline in any
celebration of any regenerative power of these organs. Instead the
major role is taken by the head, eyes, face, muscular system,
expressive elements which act to fix the body's place in relation to
the (fixed) outside world. Actions and events tend to be inter-
preted in relation to a single individuated life, again in contrast
to the cosmic/interactionist folk interpretation of Rabelais' time.
The grotesque imagery of Terry Gilliam's animations, or of the
'knight's (dismemberment) song' in Monty Python and the Holy Grail 
seems to stand in stark contrast to the giant hands, lips or bottom
variously employed by Kenny Everett to create grotesque parodies of
'individuated' media personalities such as Mick Jagger and Rod
Stewart. Indeed John Cleese and Graham Chapman did some writing for
two series of Marty Feldman's Marty. When much of their work was
not used for the second series (transmitted from 9th December 1968),
"... it became obvious that what Marty really wanted was star
vehicle sketches, whereas we were still writing sketches
with three or four equal parts. ,,40
Marty Feldman's success as individual comedian, being surely in
considerable part due to his striking eyes, is another example of
the head, the eyes and face as elements, acting to fix the modern
- 16 -
(atomised/alienated-within-capitalism) individual in relation to a
world viewed as static, in contrast to the mouth, phallus and bowels
as forming a link with a positive-regenerative pre-capitalist
universe.
And the kind of laughter is probably different too.
1.2 Excrement and manners
"The mingled splendour and squalor of the Middle Ages almost
passes belief."41
As a parallel to the previous section, and bearing in mind the
concern to work towards an understanding of the class-differentiated
nature of attitudes to the grotesque and the excremental, I would
like to make some observations about the development of thresholds
of 'decency' in relation to bodily functions, using material drawn
mostly from Norbert Elias' 'The History of Manners' .42 This
material relates primarily to French and German sources, and this
must be borne in mind in extrapolating any insights to include the
situation in Britain.
What is initially striking is the relative lack of distinction
(at least in modern terms) between the bodily habits of the ruling
class of the 15th and 16th centuries and those of the people.
Priceless expense tended to coexist with excrement and filth, and
even in courtly circles
"A proper bath, according to Russell, seems to have been an
event to be heralded with flowers, and resorted to chiefly
as curative."43
Furnivall also observes that Henry VIII was obliged to create a law
against "the filthy condition of servants in his own kitchen".
- 17 -
Equally striking in the early literature (up to the early 18th
century in France, a little later in Germany) is the frankness and
explicitness with which bodily functions are discussed, even when
some activity is being proscribed:
"To hold back urine is harmful to health, to pass it in
secret betokens modesty. .44
This explicitness is not confined to the 'educators' and chroniclers
of social habits, moreover; in an (admittedly) private letter to a
friend, the Duchess of Orleans wrote on the 9th October 1694:
"Vous etes bien heureuse d'aller chier quand vous voulez,
chiez donc tout votre chien de saOuli Nous n'en sommes pas
de meme ici, ou je Buis obligee de garder mon etron pour le
soir; il n'y a pas de frottoir aux maisons du c8te de la
fort. J'ai le malheur d'en habiter une, et par consequent
le chagrin d'aller chier dehors, ce qui me fache, parce que
j'aime a chier a mon aise quand mom cul ne porte sur rien.
Item, tout le monde nous voit chier; il y passe des hommes,
des femmes, des filles, des garsons, des abbes et des
Suisses ... Vous voyez par IA que nul plaisir sans peine,
et que si on ne chiait point, le serais a Fontainebleau
comme le poisson dans l'eau."4
This extravagance of coprology is scarcely rendered by the anodine
extract to be found in Elias:
"The smell of the mire is horrible ... Paris is a dreadful
place. The streets smell so badly that you cannot go out.
The extreme heat is causing large quantities of meat and
dish to rot in them, and this, coupled to the multitude of
people who (shit) in the street, produces a smell so detest-
able that it cannot be endured."4
We shall note later the subsequent development of 'shame thresholds'
which regulate what can/cannot be said in various situations. It
would appear, however, that before the 17th century (and again a
little later in Germany than in France) there was relatively little
differentiation regarding 'self-censorship' between the languages of
the ruling class and of other people.
The initial moves to 'educate' a 'knightly' class (of which
Erasmus's text is symptomatic) were concerned almost exclusively
with a cultivation of shame based on "what others may think". The
texts of the period were frequently addressed to children, though in
practice they were more often used to begin to regulate adult
behaviour, and incidentally to instil an attitude to the body which
moved rapidly away from any notion of grotesque realism or the
material bodily lower stratum. Though it would be wrong to see the
process as overly mechanistic, it would seem that both the suppres-
sion of the grotesque body and the instructions (both in pedagogic
and in legalist form) concerning what was to be considered distaste-
ful were motivated by what was distasteful to the masters:
"They compel them, the social inferiors in their Immediate
surroundings, to control and restrain these functions in a
way that they do not at first impose upon themselves."47
(original emphasis)
Thus it is interesting to find Furnivall's observation 48 that nearly
all English words denoting manners are of French origin (the lan-
guage of royalty in the mediaeval period): courtesy, villainy,
nurture, dignity, etiquette, debonnaire, gracious, polite, genti-
lease, etc. compared with only three of Saxon origin (thew, churl-
ish, wanton), all three significantly negative judgements of behav-
iour. The point about the ruling class not necessarily applying the
same standards to their own behaviour is elaborated by Elias him-
self49 and in another context by Dominique Laporte.
In November of 1539 Paris saw the enactment of the edict of
Villers-Cotterats, which announced new legal powers aimed at "clean-
ing" 50 the city; strict penalties involving loss of stock or
property were to be enforced chiefly for offences of wilfully
- 19 -
depositing human or other excrement in the streets: excrement was
henceforth to be kept in the house until night, then disposed of in
prescribed ways. Provision was also to be made (enforceable by
'law') for places in which excretory functions could be exercised as
discreetly as possible. There were over thirty articles in this
edict, the majority of which need not concern us here. What is of
interest is Laporte's comment that
"... les annees qui suivirent furent marquees d'abord par la
desobeissance du prince a l'egard de sa propre injonction,
comme en temoigne l'architecture de nombreux chateaux et
palais au XVIe et XVIIe siecles, dont ceux de Fontainebleau,
Saint-Cloud et Versailles."51
As noted in the letter from the Duchess of Orleans (see above), by
1694 the required modifications had not yet been carried out at
Fontainebleau. This should perhaps come as no surprise; as long
before as 1372 and again in 1395 there had been ordinances in Paris
forbidding the throwing or ordure from windows, and, John Bourke
notes, in 1513 "privies were ordered for each house in Paris." In
1764, Versailles could be described thus:
"The unpleasant odours in the park, gardens, even the cha-
teau, make one's gorge rise. The communicating passages,
courtyards, buildings in the wings, corridors, are full of
urine and feces ... the avenue Saint-Cloud is covered with
stagnant water and dead cats."53
Indeed there is also ample evidence that as regards public
places little changed over the next century or so. For example
"We civilized and refined people live amid an uncleanliness
that is a constant reminder of the infirmities to which
nature has confined us ... Nothing is more shocking ...
than our great buildings, edged with the residue of diges-
tion."54
As we noted above, the gradual movement of the 'shame threshold'
regarding bodily behaviour itself was accompanied over the period
- 20 -
between the 15th and the 18th centuries by a progressive change in
what could be spoken or written about, though the relations between
the two were always complex.
It should be stressed at this point that we are dealing with
attitudes to bodily functions and property, not with any 'objective'
evaluation of cleanliness/dirtiness. There is now considerable
evidence indicating that the Middle Ages between the 10th and the
15th centuries were marked by a relatively high level of personal
cleanliness (indeed most castles of the time were equipped with
rudimentary toilet facilities which could be found lacking two or
three centuries later during the Renaissance); this is, however, not
incompatible with the grotesque-realist attitude to excrement
described above. Roman toilets were frequently communal meeting-
places, yet were clean. By contrast, the 19th century French ladies
who did not wash their private parts too often because only prosti-
tutes did that sort of thing no doubt considered themselves quite
clean enough. 'Objectively' speaking, the Renaissance period (the
17th century in France) appears to have been a relatively 'dirty'
time, and the developments of attitudes described below should be
seen against this background. Indeed the conjunction of the shift
away from the bodily grotesque, the move into an 'objectively'
'dirty' period, and the shift from communal to personal cleanliness
will be seen to have been highly significant.
The non-correspondence between the presence of latrines/urinals
and 'civilization' was also noted by John Bourke. 55 Not only could
this be observed with the passage of time in Europe; many examples
of the non-correspondence can also be noted by comparing mutually
- 21 -
contemporary cultures. Thus
"... the New Zealanders had privies to every 3 or 4 of their
houses ... there were no privies in Madrid until 1760; the
determination of the King to introduce them and sewers, and
to prohibit the throwing of human ordure out of windows
after nightfall, as had been the custom, nearly precipitated
a revolution. 56
Though texts such as those of Tannhauser and da Riva in the 13th
century and of Erasmus in 1530 were certainly 'symptomatic' of
social relations at the time, there is also a sense in which the
frankness/explicitness of the language coexisted with a function of
cultivating feelings of shame in the reader who did not conform to
the described desirable norm. Actual behaviour in the areas of
table etiquette, nose-blowing, shitting, urinating, and passing wind
gradually underwent change over the period between the 15th and 18th
centuries (the nature of these changes is the subject of Elias'
book), but changes in attitudes as expressed in the literature are
harder to pin down. the stigmatization of shit and other excrement
and of other forms of dirt was very slow in developing, and coin-
cided, as I shall argue below, with a certain phase in the develop-
ment of capitalism.
The process from matter-of-fact advice such as
"Before you sit down, make sure your seat has not been
fouled" (Brunswick Court Regulations, 1589).57
to the euphemisms of the 18th and 19th centuries was, then, a slow
one. One example of a definite observable change is the difference
between the 1729 and 1774 editions of LaSalle's 'Les Resales de la
Biens6ance et de la Civilite' Chrgtienne'. Although the 1729 edition
already offers the advice that
"It is never proper to speak of parts of the body that should
be hidden, nor of certain bodily necessities to which Nature
has subjected us, nor even to mention them."58
- 22 -
there is nevertheless explicit detail of when or when not to emit
wind etc. The 1774 edition is considerably condensed, omits the
detail, and represents a relatively drastic shift in what can and
can not be mentioned. It is clear, of course, that what seems from
here like a fairly linear development in shame thresholds and social
attitudes involves a lot of assumptions about the underlying causes.
Even if (see below) it is feasible to see the changes between the
15th and 18th centuries in the light of a developing capitalist
system, the problem will then remain of bridging the gap between the
18th century and Monty Python. I shall leave that particular bridge
until I come to it, and comfort myself with
"The question remains whether the change in behaviour, in the
social process of the 'civilization' of man, can be under-
stood, at least in isolated phases and in its elementary
features, with any degree of precision."59
What was/(is) the motor of these changes in attitudes to the
natural functions? For Elias,
"'rational understanding' is not the motor of the 'civiliz-
ing' of eating or of other behaviour."50
For Elias, and for me, the motor of the changes is social, politi-
cal, and, in a last instance, economic. If we take the instance of
meat-eating as an example, it is first of all evident that in the
secular upper class the mediaeval period saw the consumption of
large quantities of meat (up to and over two pounds per day per
person) 51 ; relatively little meat was consumed by everyone else, for
crudely economic reasons. The manner of serving the meat, however,
would not have been so different when and where the 'lower classes',
the peasants, would have had the opportunity to eat meat. The animal
would generally have been cooked whole and large parts of it brought
- 23 -
to the table (note in passing that again this would now strike us as
exaggerated, even as grotesque: grotesque realism again). Between
the 17th and 19th centuries the serving of meat at table changed
drastically, large joints of meat being progressively replaced by
smaller and smaller cuts and individual portions.
Three factors were arguably primary in this evolution: first,
the division of labour, by which more and more of the household
production and processing activities such as weaving, spinning,
slaughtering, carpentry etc. were transferred to specialists so that
the family became little more than a consumer unit; second, the
concomitant tendency towards smaller family units; and third, the
alienation inherent in the developing capitalist social formation
which tended to produce atomized individuals for whom consumption
was primarily an individualist activity and carnivalesque excess was
an unthinkable profligacy.
A second instance of change nearer to the bowels of this
research was that in social attitudes to shit/excrement. The 1539
edict referred to above was the symptom of coming change but was not
in itself very effective. We have seen above that in grotesque
realism shit and other excrement had a positive/regenerative value:
thus whilst this does not mean that people enjoyed wallowing in the
stuff, the 'stercus homini' was nevertheless relatively free of the
vilification with which it has been repressed in our more recent
cultures.
The effect of the 1539 edict was a tendency for human waste to
become domesticated, kept at home until it could be disposed of:
-24 -
"Si l'odeur de l'excrementiel se supporte, en famille, la ou
le lien social est le plus resserrg, ii y fallait certaine-
ment la condition d'une privatisation du d gchet dont tous
les ages n'offrent pas l'exemple."62
"Cut into the flow of milk here, it's your brother's turn,
don't take a crap here, cut into the stream of shit over
there. Retention is the primary function of the family: it
is a matter of learning what elements of desiring-production
the family is going to reject, what it is going to
retain." 63
This must, even in the short term, have had far-reaching consequen-
ces in the area of social relations: on the one hand kinds of
intimacy and individuality became possible (and necessary) which
had not previously been conceived of, and on the other hand there
was the (added) obstacle to entering the other's house: the fear of
embarrassment or unpleasantness caused by a forced encounter with
this individualized excrement. Thus
"... the privatisation of human waste was only one aspect of
a larger trend, the rise of the concept of the individual
... this concept played an important role in the rise of
".64intolerance ...
"Other people's odour became a decisive criterion".65
In writing of the changes in the body of 'man' in the progress
from the despotic to the capitalist, Deleuze and Guattari note that
the citizen's organs
". .. will become those of private man, they will become pri-
vatized after the model and memory of the disgraced anus,
ejected from the social field - the obsessive fear of smel-
ling bad".66
Privatization is on the way, and
"The family has become the locus of retention and resonance
of all the social determinations ... wherever one turns, one
no longer finds anything but father-mother - this Oedipal
filth that sticks to your skin."67
There was, indeed, a 1563 amendment to the edict, which placed a
statutory requirement upon every householder in Paris to sweep the
- 25 -
road around (his) house and to make a pile of the ordure in front of
the house, to be collected at an appointed hour by a designated
cart. 68 Laporte's commentary is interesting:
"Que chacun soit tenu de 'nettoyer devant sa maison' pourrait
en effe  ne pas 8tre considere" comme negligeable pour la
place que cela occupe dans le proces au cours d'une individ-
ualisation des pratiques sociales, d'une reduction et d'un
resserrement des liens de contiguite a l'espace familial."69
"Ce petit tas de merde que j'amasse la, devant ma porte,
est a moi et nul n'en pourra me-dire si ce tas est bien
forme."70
"C'est moi que Ta regarde: la politique du dechet vient
imprimer dans le rapport du sujet a son corps quelque chose
qui n'anticipe peut-atre pas mediocrement sur l'ideologie
cartesienne du moi."71
Whatever the motives for the 1539 and 1563 edicts (the close rela-
tion between language, power and shit will be discussed later), the
consequences for the relation of the individual to the body and to
the family must have been far-reaching. We have, in fact, the
rudiments of the process by which the shame thresholds were advanced
and new forms of social behaviour internalized, with the individual
now definitively split off from the surrounding cosmos.
"The chief modelling processes, as Elias shows, were the
development of a capacity for self-distancing - that is, a
psychic splitting of individuals from their affects - and a
consequent advancing of the thresholds of shame and embar-
rassment, of the "limits of filthiness". This produced the
bodily splitting of an individual into inner and outer phys-
ical realms, with the skin forming an increasingly sharp
borderline. ,,72 (original emphasis)
Theweleit later describes how
"(the god within) was replaced in turn by a 'god without' who
dwelt on the skin and whose name was Cleanliness."
It will not be possible in these pages to go in any detail into
parallel developments in Britain. Anecdotal evidence would indicate
that in England privies appeared during the reign of Elizabeth I
- 26 -
(1558-1603). John Bourke, in referring to Sir John Harington's
'Metamorphosis of Max', declares that
"... from the description of the latrine in question there is
no doubt that Harington anticipated nearly all the mecha-
nisms of modern days."74
It is also a commonplace that the streets in Britain's cities
continued to be filthy through the 18th and 19th centuries. In the
second half of the latter century, it appears that in London
"... refuse was left in the streets. Powers to set up ...
public baths, washhouses and street-sweepers were ignored by
'vested interests in filth and dirt'."75
The two instances relating to meat-eating and to shit should be
sufficient to illustrate a point succinctly made by Norbert Elias:
"It will be seen again and again how characteristic of the
whole process that we call civilization is this movement of
segregation, this hiding 'behind the scenes' of what has
become distasteful."75
How well this also corresponds to the 'concealment' of the produc-
tion process in capitalism. The traces of labour are effaced so
that the product can fetch maximum profit and so that the consumer
is not reminded of the origins of the commodity, and the traces of
ideological work are effaced in the unconscious nature of the
imaginary relation with the conditions of existence. Nor is this
parallel of effacements only stylistic. In the case of the masking
of the labour lying behind a commodity it is a question of safe-
guarding financial investment; in the case of the unconscious
functioning of ideology it is ultimately a matter of libidinal
economy. The point is made that the relation is, indeed, more than
a parallelism, by Deleuze and Guattari:
"Not that a simple parallelism should be drawn between capi-
talist social production and desiring-production, or between
the flows of money-capital and the shit-flows of desire. The
- 27 -
relationship is much closer: desiring-machines are in social
machines and nowhere else."77
The unconscious is as material as society. We shall deal with
Deleuze and Guattari's notions of libidinal economy and desire at
greater length in a later section.
The shifts in attitudes to meat and to excrement correspond to
stages in the 'consumerisation' of these areas of human experience;
if it is true that
"In many of our meat dishes the animal form is so concealed
and changed by the art of its preparation and carving that
while eating one is scarcely reminded of its origin. 78
then it is worth asking who owns the means of production by which
the animal is slaughtered, by which the meat is cut, by which it is
processed, packaged, transported etc.
Entirely in keeping with this development was a shift from first
a "what others will think" sanction then a spiritual or religious
sanction involving some notion of what was the 'right' thing to do
in a particular situation, to hygienist explanations of why it was
better to wash hands before a meal, why it was bad to retain urine
etc. The relativity of hygienist rationales is illustrated by the
fact that where, occasionally, earlier precepts did employ some such
rationale, medical opinion was claimed to favour the freedom of
natural functions 79 (Erasmus writes that "to hold back urine is
harmful to health" and refers to "the illness-bearing power of the
retained fart"). Medical opinion since the 18th century has more
often come to be mobilized rather to support the repression of
natural functions ("Spitting ... is very bad for the health" from
'The Habits of Good Society' 1859. 80 ) In any case, the point is
- 28 -
that even where hygienist arguments are demonstrably sound, 81 their
function is not primarily philanthropic:
"These hygienic reasons then play an important role in adult
ideas on civilization, usually without their relation to the
arsenal of childhood conditioning being realized. It is
only from such a realization, however, that what is rational
in them can be distinguished from what is only seemingly
rational, i.e. founded primarily on the disgust and shame
feelings of adults."82
"The social reference of shame and embarrassment recedes more
and more from consciousness. Precisely because the social
command not to show oneself exposed or performing natural
functions now operates with regard to everyone and is
imprinted in this form on the child, it seems to the adult a
command of this own inner self and takes on the form of more
of less total and automatic self-restraint."83
One further passage by Elias can stand as a summary of this section.
"In the subsequent stage, renunciation and restraint of
impulses is compelled far less by particular persons;
expressed provisionally and approximately, it is now, more
directly than before, the less visible and more impersonal
compulsions of social interdependence, the division of
labour, the market, and competition that impose restraint
and control on the impulses and emotions. It is these pres-
sures, and the corresponding manner of explanation and con-
ditioning, which make it appear that socially desirable
behaviour is voluntarily produced by the individual himself,
on his own initiative. This applied the regulation and
restraint of drives necessary for 'work'; it also applies to
the whole pattern according to which drives are modelled in
bourgeois industrial societies. ,,84
The internalisation of hygienist principles in particular is in line
with a point make by Richard Dyer (cf. pg.13 above) that one of the
ways in which the dependency of capitalism (and its stress on the
individual) on bodily labour is occluded is through
"... the professionalism of medicine and the medicalisation
of ever increasing aspects of bodily function. 85
The generality of this whole educative process has the ideologi-
cal effect of confirming the impression that people are equal, that
we're really all the same, and, crucially, that we all choose to
conform, that we are all free agents, that ideology does not exist.
- 29 -
There are of course those who do not learn (or deliberately reject)
the rules, who are then classed as sick, insane, eccentric etc. ...
or as childish, though in fact 'our' society is massively different
from the mediaeval in that 'our' children are generally expected at
an early age to attain a far lower shame threshold than even adults
were expected to achieve four or five hundred years ago. In Philippe
Arils' words,
"... le respect d aux enfants gtait, pour lore (XVI siecle),
chose tout a fait ignore. Devant eux on se permettait
tout: paroles crues, actions et situations scabreuses; us
avaient tout entendu, tout vu 	 attouchements dont on
imagine aisgment ce qu'en dirait un psychanalyste moderne
Ce psychanalyste aurait tort."86
The pythonesque preoccupation with the grotesque, with bodily
secretions and social taboos, can thus conventionally be seen as
"sick", "abnormal", ... or "childish". Or, of course, be recuper-
ated as English eccentricity which can then be traded off against
that great British virtue, tolerance. In this respect it remains to
be seen what function the Pythons' 'rule-breaking' has in practice.
1.3 Is grotesque realism dead? 
Are there some residual aspects of the mediaeval attitudes to
the excremental which have survived into our culture? Apart from
developments such as the 'realist grotesque' referred to above, are
there other residual elements of grotesque realism to be found in
modern popular culture?
Bakhtin has identified some ways in which the 'lower material
bodily principle' lives on in contemporary language:
"The body that figures in all the expressions of the unoffi-
cial speech of the people is the body that fecundates and is
- 30 -
fecundated, that gives birth and is born, devours and is
devoured, drinks, defecates, is sick and dying. 87
He asserts that
"In all languages there is a great number of expressions
related to the genital organs, the anus and buttocks, the
belly, the mouth and the nose."88
It certainly does appear that there is not such a rich vocabulary
relating to the arms, the eyes, the face, to those parts of the body
least important to the grotesque sensibility.
Pierre Bourdieu has also identified the residues of a more
'organic' oral pleasure in the popular vision:
"Appliquant la mame 'intention' au lieu de l'ingestion ali-
mentaire et au lieu de P gmission du discours, la vision
populaire, qui apprehende bien l'unit g de l'habitus et de
l'hexis corporelle, associe aussi a la gueule la franche
acceptation et la franche manifestation des plaisirs glemen-
taires."89
To anticipate a discussion in a later section, Bourdieu also recog-
nizes the 'subversive' potential of the lower material bodily
stratum in the sexually explicit mode of 'unofficial' speech; this
"franc-parler dont les audaces sont moms innocentes qu'il ne
parait puisque, en rabaissant l'humanit g a la commune
nature, ventre, cul et sexe, tripes, bouffe et merde,
tend a mettre le monde social cul par-dessus tete."9
This kind of language, abundant in excremental and genital refer-
ences, would correspond to a celebratory mood in keeping with
grotesque realism.
At other points in his analysis Bakhtin tempers his euphoric
valorisation of the 'unofficial' language with a more pessimistic
view:
"... modern indecent abuse and cursing have retained dead and
purely negative remnants of the grotesque concept of the
body ... These expressions ... are fragments of an alien
language in which certain things could be said in the past
but which at present conveys nothing but senseless abuse.91
In this case the regenerative/positive aspects of the grotesque body
would have been lost.
Whilst the celebratory mode and the aggressive/alienated abusive
mode would seem to coexist in our culture, I feel that Bakhtin has a
tendency on the whole to undervalue 'official' language and its
power.
This ambivalence is caught by Eagleton.
"The laughter of carnival is both plebeian derision and ple-
beian solidarity, an empty semiotic flow which in decompos-
ing significance nevertheless courses with the impulse of
comradeship. ,,92
The fact that Eagleton's "comradeship" is probably different
from the cosmic undifferentiation of (Bakhtin's) mediaeval grotesque
compounds the ambivalence.
It doesn't take a law or an edict to make/keep a language clean
(yes, there was another edict in 1539, one concerned with cleansing
the official French language of Latin and other impurities):
"La langue parle ainsi:
'Pourquoi suis-je si belle?
,.93Parce que mon maitre me lave.
Indeed the effectiveness of such laws/edict is disputable:
"... les 'moeurs linguistiques' ne se laissent pas modifier
par dgcrets comme le croient souvent lea partisans d'une
politique volontariste de 'defence de la langue'."94
Rather is it a complex set of 'Ideological State Apparata'
(ISA's), 95 particularly the educational, cultural and family ISA's
which confirm, in a way which bypasses consciousness, a 'legitimate'
language.
- 32 -
In relation to the excremental, it is arguable that in our
culture a relaxation of taboos is taking place. According to
Elias," this would be due to the institutionalisation and the
internalisation of 'standard practices' relating to excretory
functions, and the development of a technology which allows the
concealment of the process to be taken for granted. The relaxation
can then take place in the context of an already established secure
standard. The Monty Python films can no doubt be seen as (one of
many other) symptoms of this relaxation.
What relation such a relaxation has to deep-seated attitudes to
anality is another matter. For Norman 0. Brown,
"Technological progress makes increased sublimation possible
... it follows that what we call historical progress, or
higher civilization, means an increase in the domain of the
death instinct at the expense of the life instinct."'"
Since
"Sublimation is the mortification of the body and a seques-
tration of the life of the body into dead things.""
presumably even Brown would agree that this would not be a good
thing.
The concept of sublimation is a cue for the next subsection.
1.4 Psychoanalysis and the excremental 
"Ii y a une necessit g culturelle du refoulement pour arriver
au langage."99
In this section I shall try to deal with some of the psychoana-
lytic determinants of contemporary (and to some extent past) atti-
tudes to the excremental. Though questions of power and language
are closely linked to this, I shall try to avoid them until the
following subsection.
It is important to try to go beyond the traditional Freudian
notion of the anal phase which precedes a genital phase. Whilst
these 'phases' do exist (at least heuristically) the more Important
thing is to recognize in what ways the anal always returns, never
actually goes away, and what the precise mechanisms are by which
psychological attitudes to the excremental are instituted. It is
crucial to avoid the mistake of
"... conceiving the Oedipus complex to be an inescapable
structural necessity of the process of socialisation (inser-
tion into the symbolic order), rather than seeing it as a
historically determined variant of that process."10
Nevertheless a summary of the contemporary significance of anality
is in order.
Fran5oise Dolto adduces empirical evidence to argue the primacy
of a sense of smell in new-born babies. She has found that babies
will often refuse to feed in the absence of the mother' 8101 smell,
and that, conversely, a baby will feed in the mother's absence if
her smell is present (e.g. an article of clothing). She has found
that if the mother's smell is removed entirely then this can lead to
an entire loss of the sense of smell which in some cases can be
restored through psychoanalysis.
The smell of the infant's own shit then comes to mediate in the
olfactory relation to the mother; filling the nappy becomes a means
of expressing desire for the mother:
"Mais quand sa mere n'est pas la et quand il en a besoin,
qu'il desire une communication inter-psychique, en faisant
- 34 -
dans ses langes ii y a l'odeur qui est comme un appel de lui
a maman, grace a cette zone mediatrice de leur relation."12
- thus while the infant is not yet able to communicate orally (has
not yet begun to enter the Symbolic), he/she communicates anally, by
producing a smell which will attract mother's attention; in a secure
relationship with the mother the warmth of a full nappy is comfort-
ing in its promise of imminent attention. At this stage shit has a
reassuring function and is not (usually) the source of any anxiety;
in Deleuze and Guattari's vocabulary, the partial objects with which
the child is surrounded, mother, shit, urine, milk, nappy, toys etc.
are at the service of so many desiring-machines and have not yet
become attached to a particular socius. This non-differentiation is
noted also by Melanie Klein (cf. pg.10 above).
It is with the capacity for independent bodily movements that
the problems start.
"Lorsque l'enfant arrive a une motricite qui le rend capable
de porter les mains vers ce qu'il d6sire et d'imiter la
maman, la maman qui prend lea excrements, elle l'en empgche.
Or jusque	 pensait avec sa logique orale qu'elle les
mangeait ou les manipulait pour le plaisir, comme lui see
joujoux."103
The problem of the anal stage (for the infant) is to "understand"
that the mother can handle the shit, but that he/she (the infant) is
not allowed to do so:
"C'est comme si maman disait: 'Non tu n'as pas le droit d'y
toucher. J'avais, j'ai le droit d'y toucher mais toi non.'
La maman s'angoisse parce que c'est d ggotitant, et qu'elle a
peur qu'il s'infecte. (Ces ides de mamani). Pipi, caca,
poison."1"
The problem poses itself for the infant as having to throw away this
part of oneself without having felt/smelt/tasted it, and since in
the infant's awareness this is what the mother-figure must do when
she takes the shit away, the message is "Ii t i est interdit de
- 35 -
devenir adulte" 15 Moreover there is the perplexing disparity
between the infant's experience and the mother's instruction:
"Alors que ga sent bon, maman declare que ca sent mau-
.106vais.
which is a problematisation of the identification with the mother;
the latter can then only be maintained if the anxiety about the shit
is repressed and it is agreed that "Mummy knows best":
"Il lui faut introjecter un langage et une ethique qui denie
valeur a quelque chose de son gtre vivant qui,jusque-la
bait narcissisant. Je pense ,que pour tout bbe ce 'men-
songe' qui va le rendre adapte a la vie humaine eat ressenti
comme une alienation a sa verit6 pour accepter une veritg
qu'il lui faut decouvrir afin de continuer sa promotion vers
l'indentification aux adultes."107
"L'Enfant decouvre que ses parents sont hypocrites et
injustes, qu'il y a deux poids et deux mesures: lea grands
et lea petits n'ont pas lea m gmes droits. Ii faut donc
parvenir a gtre grand et fort afin de pouvoir prendre sa
revanche, afin de faire toutes les chases defendues, de se
permettre enfin de les interdire a plus petit que soi: on
peut alors dominer et reprimer ses propres enfants."1"
The use of the work "propre" here is not simply coincidental.
"... 'anal cleanliness' (is) the formation in the child of
the small responsible person; and there is a relation
between 'private cleanliness' and 'private ownership' (pro-
prete privee, propriete privee) which is not merely an asso-
ciation of words but something inevitable."109
The role of sublimation and of anality in the privateness of prop-
erty will be discussed below. The real point, however, is that
"... property remains excremental, and is known to be excre-
mental in our secret heart, the unconscious." 110
This repression can rarely be effected without the appearance of
some symptoms of resistance (often hiding 'precious objects' behind
radiators, in boxes, under floorboards), and Freudian orthodoxy has
it that most if not all 'adult' collecting activities, including
most hobbies such as stamp-collecting, trainspotting, money-saving,
even collecting knowledge (reading?) are an unconscious working out
- 36 -
of unassimilated sexual taboos through sublimation and displacement.
This means of dealing with repressed anal anxieties can be seen as a
more or less inevitable consequence of socialisation in our kind of
(capitalist) social formation.
Collecting can be seen as a symptom of anal anxiety. As Thewe-
leit points out this, however, is by no means the whole story ...
"So-called toilet-training turns out then, to be a process of
drying up the child and instilling guilt feelings. Tradi-
tional psychoanalysis wrongly limits the consequences of
that process to the creation of the 'anal' type, the charac-
ter with a compulsion for order: the pedant, the collector,
the happy statistician, the bureaucrat, or the inspired pos-
itivist. 'Toilet training' must have broader consequence
than that. With its compulsion for mopping up, it emerges
as the primary force for implementing sexual repression in
the widest sense and, in combination with the installations
of adult guilt feelings in children's bodies, as the essen-
1tial process for producing sexual anxiety.. 1
with profound effects on the way in which we inhabit the world and
our bodies. Whilst
"... archaic man characteristically has a massive structure
of excremental magic, which indicates the degree to which
his anality remains unsublimated ..."112
the 'symptoms' of anality in the Western capitalist world are
typically characterised by the absence of excrement, and, for Norman
0. Brown, ultimately by the absence of any link with the living
body.
"... the morbid attempt to get away from the body can only
result in a morbid fascination ... in the death of the
body. ,,l13
To rise above the body is then to equate the body itself with
excrement. The sublimatory movement out of the body is also, and
more controversially, for Brown intimately tied to the development
of the psychic structures which anticipated capitalism:
"The drive to sublimate is the same as the desire to produce
an economic surplus."114
- 37 -
He is certainly not entirely wrong to suggest the close link. He
notes that Aristotle had already identified money-making as "an
unnatural perversion"; 115 that
"the prudential calculating character (the ideal type of Homo
Economicus) is an anal character."116
is, since Freud, part of psychoanalytic orthodoxy. In Freudian
theory, there is indeed no room for an excessively prudential (anal)
character.
"Prudential calculation as such is an anal trait; the theory
of the anal character is a theory of what Max Weber called
the capitalist spirit, and not just a deviant exaggeration
such as the miser." 117 (original emphasis)
It comes as no surprise that for Freudian psychoanalysis the desire
for or accumulation of knowledge itself has its roots in repressed
anality, expressing as it does an extension of "the possessive
instinct." This idea is taken further by Ferenczi:
"Thinking is after all only a means of preventing a squander-
ing through action, so that thinking is only a special
expression of the tendency to economize and as such has its
origins in anal-eroticism." 119 (original emphasis)
A reminder that the anal-erotic complex, and, indeed, the
tendency to economize, are not transcultural absolutes but are
intimately linked to an Oedipal unconsciousness, comes from Deleuze
and Guattari:
"If it is true that thought can be evaluated in terms of the
degree of oedipalisation, then yes, whites think too
much. ,,119
Whether the product of the sublimation be money, a big collection of
matchboxes, or knowledge, that product is accorded as much value as
is denied to the repressed shit.
"Thus it is that what belongs to the lowest depths in the
minds of each one of us is changed, through this formation
of the ideal, into what we value highest.n120
- 38 -
"In fact sublimation is exercised on the anus as on no other
organ, in the sense that the anus is made to progress from
the lowest to the highest point: anality is the very move-
ment of sublimation itgelf."121
This centrality of the anus to the very existence of sublimation is
also echoed by Deleuze and Guattari.
"It is the anus itself that ascends on high, under the condi-
tions ... of its removal from the field, conditions that do
not presuppose sublimation, since on the contrary sublima-
tion results from them. It is not the anal that presents
itself for sublimation, it is sublimation in its entirety
that is anal ... The whole of Oedipus is anal and implies
an individual overinvestment of the organ to compensate for
its collective disinvestment."22
The lowly (?) status of the anus brings us back to the relega-
tion of shit to bad object. Nevertheless it has been remarked in a
number of contexts that the smell of one's own excrement is
generally tolerable if not indeed positively enjoyable; it is the
smell of others' excrement which is unpleasant. 123 Indeed there are
cases of 'anosmic' disorders in which sense of smell has been partly
or completely lost; this corresponds to a troubled repression based
on insecurity in regard to the mother-figure in early infancy. It is
interesting to note in this context Kant's remark that that which is
beautiful has no smell. In reference to this, Laporte's observation
that "ce qui sent trouble la vue" 124 underlines the almost total
displacement of the olfactory by the visual sense in our culture.
In its repression of the more fundamental drives this subjugation is
also profoundly educative.
"L'Odeur devient l'innommable et le beau ce guise fonde de
l' glimination de l'odeur, concomitante du proces
d'individuation du dgchet, de son instauration dans la
sphere du privg."25
Another sense in which the origins of the sense of smell need to
be repressed is to do with the semiological status of smells:
"L'odeur r6siste a la mise en scene. Obstinement, elle con-
tinue de pencher du cOte de l'indice ..."126
To use a relatively crude linguistic model, what is the 'signifier'
of a smell? After all, ".. our language is of no use when it comes
to describing the smellable world ...". 127 It is in keeping with
the pre-signifying phase of the infant's development that the sense
of smell should be so unavailable to language; for smell to become a
sign would risk the invasion of consciousness by the repressed
origins with their embarrassing baggage of frustrated anality.
Laporte (as so often) puts it provocatively:
"Car toute odeur, primitivement, est une odeur de merde."129
Brown cites Freud in referring to
"... the coprophilic instinctual components, which have
proved incompatible with our aesthetic standards of culture,
probably since, as a result of our adopting an erect gait,
we raised our organs of smell from the ground."129
Though I hope to indicate some of the ways in which attitudes to
anality have been/are indirectly products of socioeconomic change,
the above observation may indeed constitute some kind of baseline.
Brown also seems to accept this.
"The whole of sexuality and not merely anal erotism is
threatened with falling a victim to the organic repression
consequent upon man's adoption of the erect posture and the
lowering of the value of the sense of smell."13
One objection often made to psychoanalytic models is their
remoteness from ready experience, their seeming inaccessibility.
Unfortunately this is a feature of the discipline which has simple
to be either accepted or refused in a context such as this in which
more detailed work on the fundamental concepts of psychoanalysis is
not practicable.
A second objection, one which is worth more extended discussion,
is that much psychoanalytic theory is ahistorical, absolutist, and
appears, at least, to posit processes and psychic structures (such
as the mirror phase and the Oedipus complex) as if they were
unchanging, "eternal" .131 There has certainly been this tendency,
but one can identify a number of attempts to situate psychoanalytic
notions historically.
The problem is posed by Norbert Elias:
"It may be that there have always been 'neuroses'. But the
'neuroses' we see about us today are a specific historical
form of psychic conflict which needs psychogenetic and
sociogenetic elucidation."132
and by Dominique Laporte:
"Les objets que la doctrine freudienne isole et experimente
comme fondamentaux, il faut aller les reconnaitre a l'oeuvre
dans l'histoire."133
Within his assumption of the primacy of the anal instance, Brown
makes much the same point:
"The anal character of civilization is a topic which requires
sociological and historical as well as psychological treat-
ment." 134
Clearly, also, there is no question of a straightforward linear
development (towards repression); it is necessary to consider the
particular social/economic determinants in a particular conjuncture
to understand why particular psychological/psychoanalytic notions
come to be favoured.
When, however, Brown notes that
- 41 -
"for Erich Fromm, economic structures cause the changes in
character structure; that is to say, capitalism generates
the capitalist spirit"138
he does not really endorse Fromm's view, but tends to put the terms
the other way round and to deal in a kind of essentialism. His
commentary on the psychic geography of Protestantism, capitalism and
many aspects of civilization in general is fascinating and insight-
ful, but his invocation of notions such as "there is something in
the human psyche which commits man to non-enjoyment, to work ..."138
weaken his position somewhat. At least he recognizes the temporal
mutability of repressive mechanisms:
"What the temporal relativity of time concepts really signi-
fies, and it is a hopeful sign, is that the structure of
basic repression is not immutable. What Mircea Eliade
really discovered is a significant difference in the struc-
ture of repression between archaic and modern man. 137
The piece by Mia Campioni and Liz Gross (footnote 100) is an
exemplary resituation of the Freudian and Lacanian projects, with
particular care paid to distinguishing between natural/biological
and social/ideological factors. It is partly an (itself ideologi-
cally overdetermined) confusion of these factors which allows the
psychoanalytic orthodoxy to be
"... committed to the assumption of pre-given desires and
objects of desire, emanating naturally from the human organ-
ism. In other words, they postulate as individual, objects
and desires which, we maintain, can only be seen as the
effects of quite specific relations of power."138
Contrary to this, and sensibly enough, Campioni and Gross
"... see the Oedipus complex as the precondition for the
stratification of subjects by class and power relations in
bourgeois society."138
The way in which this stratification occurs is an important part of
their project. Particular attention is paid to the constitution of
the phallus as privileged signifier; its primacy is due to the
- 42 -
infant's interiorisation of clues given (mostly) by the parents, who
already find themselves in a patriarchal social formation in which
the phallus rules.
"By emphasizing the castration fears, at the same time it is
affirmed that there is something to be afraid of, the power
of the role of Symbolic father. Thus it is not accidental
that the systematic playing-down of the childbirth fears and
the systematic relegation of the role of the mother to the
passive one is effected. The playing down of one half of
the fear is a means whereby patriarchal values are trans-
mitted." 140 (original emphasis)
Campioni and Gross point out Freud's (unconscious) complicity in
laying the foundations of a potentially ahistorical, socially
manipulative discipline.
"Freud cannot acknowledge that what we are witnessing is not
a natural process at all, but is an example par excellence
of the active imposition of the Oedipal network by the psy-
choanalytic institution, as embodied by Freud, the father
and the mother." 141 (original emphasis)
The place of psychoanalytic explanation is rather thus defined:
"... what we want to show is the relationship of the Oedipal
process to infantile socialisation in a society that demands
uniquely individual and sexually differentiated sub-
jects."142
so that Oedipal configurations are far from ubiquitous, far from
necessary. Indeed
"It was Geza Roheim who said in all seriousness that the
Oedipus complex was not to be found if it wasn't looked
for." 143
Oedipal configurations are the necessary corollary of a certain type
of social formation:
"... all that can really be said is that given the way the
infant's sexuality must be channelled in our society (i.e.
the terms of power and sex), the Oedipus complex is probably
the necessary outcome, but certainly not the natural
one. ,,144
"The process of oedipalisation is necessary for inscription
into the class ideology of patriarchy and ensures that the
polymorphous impulses of the child are channelled into the
alternatives of masculinity and femininity, and that these
- 43 -
limits institute a difference of power and status between
the 'opposite' sexes."145
Nor are conscious attempts to oppose/overturn conventional sexual
practices bound to succeed:
"... la revolution sexuelle comme redemption du corps total
par le seul exercise des organes ggnitaux est une aberra-
tion, une Lmbgcilitg aussi monstrueuse que le puritanisme
hypocrite des generations antgrieures ..."146
"tout se passe come si (Reich nous disait): au mains a ne
sortira pas du petit carre genital, de la petite touffe des
poils pubiens (analogue en cela a Freud qui enferme
l'inconscient dans la famille d'Oedipe)..147
This is echoed by Deleuze and Guattari, for whom
"There is a hypothesis dear to Freud: the libido does not
invest the social field as such except on condition that it
be desexualized and sublimated. If he holds BO closely to
this hypothesis, it is because he wants above all to keep
sexuality in the limited framework of Narcissus and Oedipus,
the ego and the family. .148
By contrast, they assert that
"the relation to the nonfamilial is always primary: in the
form of sexuality of the field in social production, and the
nonhuman sex in desiring-production."145
Taking up the kind of critique exemplified by Bruckner and Finkielk-
raut,
"we admit that any comparison of sexuality with cosmic phe-
nomena such as 'electrical storms', 'the blue of the
orgone', 'St. Elmo's fire and the bluish formations of sun-
spot activity', fluids and flows, matter and particles, in
the end appear to us more adequate than the reduction of
sexuality to the pitiful little familialist secret.15
To return to Campioni and Gross; their piece is primarily
concerned with an elucidation of ways in which Freud's analysis of
the 'Little Hans' case itself represents a contribution to the
redistribution of "omnidirectional" impulses in the infant into a
stereotypical masculine sexuality. Much of this need not concern us
here, but one account of the way the parents (and other figures,
- 44 -
such as Dr. Freud) are crucial in "transcribing" unconscious adult
values into the infant's (un)consciousness has a breadth which also
encompasses the excremental.
"This transcription has two phases as well as a necessary a
priori material base in the structural constraints of family
relations. Firstly, one which contains sexual messages from
the unconscious of the parents (and Freud) which are highly
contradictory (because they are the effects of an adult
unconscious and censorship). This is the phase that creates
anxiety in Hans. Secondly, we get the transcription of the
anxiety into sexual wishes experienced as emanating from the
child. The result is 1) the inculcation of guilt, and 2)
the absolution of guilt through adopting the parents' con-
cept of Hans. The boy is 'cured' or subdued, i.e. success-
fully inserted into the social order." 151 (original empha-
This account is, among other things, a good description of the
'socialisation' of anality outlined above. The Campioni and Gross
analysis of the 'Little Hans' case is a little thin on anality; the
main reference is to the linking of excretory functions with child-
birth:
"On April 24th my wife and I enlightened Hans up to a certain
point: we told him that children grow inside their mummy and
are then brought into the world by being pressed out of her
like a 'lumf' and that this involves a great deal of
pain. ,,l52
In Hans' mind childbirth thus becomes associated with shitting, and,
in campioni and Gross's words, "(passed) on to childbirth a disgust-
ing property". 153 This presupposes, of course, that our Hans had
been effectively toilet-trained and had learned that "Pipi, caca,
poison."
A related series of points bearing more particularly on the
Oedipal is made by Deleuze and Guattari. The Oedipal is real
enough, and
"we do not deny that there is an Oedipal sexuality, Oedipal
heterosexuality and homosexuality, an Oedipal castration, as
- 45 -
well as complete objects, global images and specific egos.
We deny that these are productions of the unconscious."154
For Deleuze and Guattari, the unconscious in its pristine state has
nothing to do with Oedipus.
"The question, rather, is that of the absolutely anoedipal 
nature of the production of desire." 155 (original emphasis)
Rather is it a case of a (social) repression of the desiring-
machines of the unconscious, and of the emergence of an oedipal
structure as a displaced locus of repression:
"Such is the nature of Oedipus - the sham image. Repression
does not operate through Oedipus, nor is it directed at
Oedipus. It is not a question of the return of the
repressed. Oedipus is a factitious product of psychic
repression. Repression cannot act without displacing
desire, without giving rise to a consequent desire, all
ready, all warm for punishment, and without putting this
desire in the place of the antecedent desire on which
repression comes to bear in principle or in reality." 156
(original emphasis)
"For Oedipus to be occupied, it is not enough that it be a
limit or a displaced represented in the system of represen-
tation; it must migrate to the heart of this system and
itself come to occupy the position of the representative of
desire. These conditions, inseparable from the paralogisms
of the unconscious, are realized in the capitalist forma-
tion."157
This notion has its place here, allied as it is to the Campioni and
Gross material. Its full significance, however, will be more
evident later, especially when we come to look at models of plea-
sure/desire in Section 2 below.
This material should enable us to gain some fresh insights into
the specificities of attitudes to the excremental, though clearly
the further back in time one goes, the more speculation is involved.
Nevertheless,
"Quand on lit des ouvrages Bur le Moyen Age, on voit la
maniere dont les gens etaient beaucoup plus libres dans
leurs pulsions anales. C r est parce qu'il n'y avait pas de
condamnation du tout."158
- 46 -
I have touched on some of the development in excremental attitudes
in a previous subsection, but one further determinant (itself the
product of other more economic determinants) was the development of
nappies for babies. Referring to adult attitudes to excrement,
Fran?oise Dolto remarks:
"C'est quelque chose de nouveau dans notre civilization.
Avant le 'langeage a l'anglaise' les enfants etaient langes
bebes, mais des qu'ils marchaient us n'avaient pas de
langes et tres souvent d'ailleurs ils avaient le cul nu. Ils
etaient sur le bras de la mere ou d'une grand-mere en perma-
nence. Quand ils avaient besoin de defequer ou de pisser,
on les nettoyait tout de suite, il y avait beaucoup de monde
autour des enfants. Des qu'ils etaient en age de marcher,
ils avaient des cottes et ils faisaient oU Ta se trouvait,
on balayait, ce n'etait pas quelque chose dont la mere avait
l'air d'e'tre ni friande, ni horrifiee. Le sol etait de
terre battue." 159
Thus until comparatively recently little fuss was made when small
infants shat or urinated on the floor, because other conditions
(numbers of people present who could help, nature of the floor,
nature of the cleaning process) made it an event of little signifi-
cance.
"La proprete est venue seulement avec le 'langeage a
l'anglaise' au temps de la reine Victoria en 1900. Il n'y
avait pas cette contradiction ethique tout d'un coup donne
a l'enfant: tu n'as pas le droit de devenir adulte sur ce
plan. .160
For Dolto too, then, the development of unconsciously internalized
excremental taboos is linked to specific factors (economic determi-
nants in disguise), 161 though as may have been seen above for her
there are important biological/natural "constants" such as the
primacy of the sense of sme11. 162 The gradual masking of this
privacy over the 18th and 19th centuries is well charted by Alain
Corbin; according to him, by 1908 the decline in the role of olfac-
tion was feared by some to indicate the "degeneracy of civiliza-
tion."
- 47 -
"But Berillon was also very conscious that a return to a lar-
ge-scale use of the sense of smell might signify regression;
we thus see yet again the narrow dividing line. .163
Though the proscriptions relating to smell are more subtle,
others are not:
"C'est tout fait refoule et pourtant combien voyons-nous de.	 .	 .	 A
meres horrifiees que l'enfant touche seulement a la pate a
modeler. Le toucher d'une matiare molle a former, c'est
comme si c'etait interdit."164
Thus any brown/sticky/paste-like matter also rekindles anxiety in
the modern adult psyche, indeed by a kind of contagion the obses-
sion with domestic cleanliness and order (and Law and Order?) is
also symptomatic of repression of anal impulses. And the develop-
ment of the more or less rigid mechanisms of repression were surely
prefigured by the gradual 'advances' in soup- and sauce-eating in
the 17th and 18th centuries 165 in which contact became more and more
improper. In Elias' formulation the distinction between excrement
and food becomes blurred:
"If a child tries to touch something sticky, wet or greasy
with his fingers, he is told: 'You must not do that, people
do not do things like that'. And the displeasure towards
such conduct which is thus aroused by the adult finally
arises through habit, without being induced by another per-
son. ,,166
The notion of repression, then, is one with particular configu-
rations according to the conjuncture. Dominique Laporte has sug-
gested an interesting contrasting precursor to the repression
necessary for the formation of the alienated atomized individual in
post-industrial society:
"... tout se passe comme si l'espece de refoulement qui
semble caracteriser sur cette maniere ,l'emergence d'un dis-
cours du capitalisme avait ete ' precede dans lee periodes
anterieures par des figures differentes de la representation
qui s'apparenteraient bien plus au mode du deni. D'un deni
- 48 -
marque de la volonte de maintenir a tout prix la croyance au
pouvoir curatif et esthetique de l'excrement contre un sa y
-oir primordial qui n'aurait pas cease de tenir la merde
comme un mauvais objet."-67
Thus the denial of this basically "bad object" involved a catalogue
of (sometimes but not always quasi) scientific/medical uses for more
or less obscure excrements: "l'eau de millefleurs" (distilled
cow-pats); "stercus nigrum" (rats-droppings) used against constipa-
tion; "album graecum" (powdered dogshit) used for throat illnesses;
urine used as a mouthwash to combat ulcers; faecal distillations as
face lotions; not to mention the dozens of uses of urine listed by
Pliny. 168 What is interesting here is not so much the veracity (or
otherwise) of these accounts as the fact that they exist as 
literature. For Laporte this literature (of the 17th and 18th
centuries) constituted an "erotique anale", a rediscovery of the
positivity of excrement which had in fact been written of (at least)
ever since Pliny and his contemporaries. If, as I have remarked
elsewhere above, the period between the Middle Ages and the age of
capitalism saw the gradual disappearance of the grotesque material
bodily lower stratum and its celebration of regenerative excrement,
this denial of shit as bad object was perhaps a lingering testimony
to its positive aspect.
Another kind of perspective within which the development of
recent forms of repression can be viewed is provided by Norman
Brown. He borrows Mircea Eliade' 2 169 distinction between archaic
and modern conceptions of time in relation to deep-seated guilt.
Archaic time is cyclical, seasonal, even synchronic, and "cosmic
guilt" would be dealt with by periodic expiation, hence the cathar-
sis of the misrule/inversion festivals, of archaic forms of carni-
- 49 -
val. The 'modern' conception of time, by contrast, is linear
(diachronic), progressive, and guilt is dealt with (most obviously
in the major Western religions) through notions of ultimate rede-
mption at the end of time. The guilt then has no way out, and must
needs be repressed, sublimated.
"Sublimation is the defence mechanism characteristic of civi-
lized man, undoing (expiation) the defence mechanism of
archaic man."17
We can see how this relates to the above dual attitude to excrement.
The rehabilitation of "good shit" and a celebration of its life-
enhancing properties would have been a part of the inversion/misrule
strategy of periodic expiation, whereas the sublimation of anality
is a necessary corollary to the repression of feelings of guilt in a
situation where redemption can only be posthumous.
"The modern consciousness represents an increased sense of
guilt, more specifically a breakthrough from the unconscious
of the truth that the burden of guilt is unpayable."171
Could it be that the Monty Python films are symptoms of a denial of
repression which similarly allows the emergence of a more ambivalent
excrement?
1.5 Language, excrement and power
This should be the last subsection before we begin, in Section
II, to approach the work of Monty Python and its immediate context.
Here I should like to draw together some of the ideas circulating
above and to introduce some notions about language, power and the
State; I hope the links with the excremental will emerge below. Let
us start with language, and refer back to the reservation expressed
above (pg.32) about Bakhtin's confidence in 'unofficial' language.
Bourdieu's thesis in 'Ce Que Parler Veut Dire' (footnote 89
above) about linguistic power and 'official' language stresses that
it is neither the purely structural aspects of a linguistic system
which determine its function or its efficacy, nor is it entirely the
social context:
"Une sociologie structurale de la langue, instruite de Saus-
sure mais construite contre l'abstraction qu'il opere, doit
se donner pour objet la relation qui unit des systemes
structures de diff grences linguistiques sociologiquement,
pertinentes et des systemes egalement structures de differ-
ences sociales."172
The central concepts in Bourdieu's analysis are those of linguistic
competence, which is mediated by the family/class background and by
'official' education, the notion of linguistic capital, which is
more or less available to the individual in any communication
situation according to the family/class/school/further education to
which he/she has been exposed, and the capacity to make distinctions'
about the appropriateness and effectivity of particular discourses
in particular situations. Nor need these notions be seen as idle
metaphor:
"Knowledge, information and specialized education are just as
much parts of capital ('knowledge capital') as is the most
elementary labour of the worker."73
The shrewd investment of linguistic capital on the linguistic market 
can then make a profit:
"... profit matgriel et symbolique que lee lois de formation
des prix caracteristiques d'un certain marche promettent
objectivement aux detenteurs d'un certain capital linguis-
tique	 Cela signifie que lee 'moeurs linguistiques' ne
se laissent pas modifier par decrets comme le croient , sou-
vent les partisans d'une politique volontariste de 'defense
de la langue'.. 174
Thus for example a person from a materially poor background with
little parental support in any external education and a (therefore
more than likely) relatively unstimulating school education is
- 51 -
likely to have linguistic capital limited to the peer-group and the
immediate home environment. By contrast, one of the important
functions performed by "interested middle-class parents" (with books
in the house) or by a grammar-school kind or education is to furnish
the school-leaver with a capacity for choice regarding where and how
to invest linguistic capital. What is more, this will apply to
everyday social situations as well as to finding a ('good') job,
getting promotion etc., the latter corresponding to Bourdieu's
"profit matgriel" and the former to a diverse variety of "symbolic"
profits in the area of friendship, satisfaction, power relations.
"... toutes les expressions verbales, qu'il s'agisse de pro-
pos gchanggs entre deux amis, du discours d'apparat d'un
porte-parole autorise ou d'un compte rendu scientifique,
portent la marque de leurs conditions de r gception et doiv-
ent une part de leurs propriet gs (mame au niveau de la gram-
maire) au fait que, sur la base d'une anticipation pratique
des lois du marchg considere, leurs auteurs, le plus souvent
sans le savoir ni le vouloir expressement, s' gfforcent de
maximiser le profit symbolique qu'ils peuvent obtenir de
pratiques inseparablement destines la communication et
exposes a l'gvaluation."275
This kind of model fits very neatly with the notion of the education
system as an Ideological State Apparatus; linguistic capital is
subtly distributed in such a way that those who accept to exercise
their capital on the market gain a profit and are, by and large,
likely to be grateful to a system which has educated them to be able
to do so, and will return a part of the (material) profit so that
the Educational ISA may continue to function in the same way.
One common kind of "profit" is the acceptation/admiration to be
gained by a politician or other public figure (who normally speaks
'official' language) when she/he condescends to use a language-
system of lower status, such as a dialect. The point in an example
cited by Bourdieu 176 is that the peasant does not possess the
- 52 -
linguistic capital (the ability to speak 'well' any language except,
in this example, "bearnais") to make an effective political inter-
vention - or rather to believe that he can make the intervention,
for a large part of linguistic power depends on the widespread
acceptance of a dominant official language.177
The greater bourgeois propensity for profit-making in general
compared with the working class is one reason for the existence of
levels of complexity of speech; Bourdieu has used his model to
considerably modify Bernstein's notions of "elaborated" and
"restricted" codes. Thus for instance Bourdieu identifies what
Lakoff178 has called "hedges" (phrases such as "sort of", "pretty
much", "rather", "technically" etc.) as marks used in bourgeois
speech to show a "neutralizing distance" from a discourse, a dis-
tance which allows the appearance of control, of distinction, BO of
power. These "hedges", then,
".	 sont une affirmation d'une capacite de tenir ses dis-
tances a l'egard de ses propres propos, donc de ses propres
interets, et du m8me coup a l'egard de ceux qui, ne sachant
pas tenir cette distance, se laissent emporter par leurs
propos, s'abandonnent sans retenue ni censure a la pulsion
expressive. p179
The aspect of this model which is of most interest here is that
involving the "hexis corporelle" (something like "the way of inha-
biting the body").
"Ce n'est pas par hasard que la distinction bourgeoise inves-
tit dans son rapport au langage l'intention m8me qu'elle
engage dans son rapport au corps. .180
In contrast to the distanced relation which the middle-class/
bourgeois sensibility entertains in relation to both language and
body, the 'popular'/working-class sensibility characteristically
- 53 -
refuses "airs and graces" and prefers what is rudely "natural". One
example instanced by Bourdieu is the use of the words "bouche" and
"gueule" for mouth, in
"... l'opposition, sexuellement surdeterminee, entre la
bouche plutot fermge, pincee, c'est a dire tendue et censu-
re, et par 11 f6minine, et la queule, largement et franche-
ment ouverte, 'f endue' 	 c'est a dire detendue et libre,
et par 11 masculine. "181 (original emphasis)
Linked to these two words are a number of expressions which also
perfectly illustrate the opposition: "bouche fine", 11vres pincges",
"bouche en cul-de-poule", "la petite bouche", expressions which all
encapsulate distance, disdain, constipation, opposed to "grande
gueule", "engueuler", "eller gueuler", "taire sa gueule",
"degueuler" etc., expressions concerned with directness, openness,
sincerity, exaggeration, and contact with the outside world.
Once again the imagery is striking. "Gueule", an open mouth,
"degueuler", to be sick, and the positivity, the energy ... This is
surely the language which Bakhtin describes as carnivalesque, which
"... is gay, triumphant, at the same time mocking, deriding.
It asserts and denies, buries and revives."182
and which (cf. pg.31 above) at least contains elements of grotesque
realism.
One final crucial question is: how did this happen? Given that
there is now a system of power relations supporting a capitalist
social formation, and that language plays an important role in
maintaining those power relations, how did the particular sets of
linguistic differences develop? Again I can offer only a few
speculations (predictably, related to the excremental).
Dominique Laporte begins his examination of this very question
with a juxtaposition of the two 1539 edicts. For him, "si la langue
eat belle, c'est qu'un maitre la lave".- 83 Who cleans/washes, is
the master and controls language. So that this language may remain
strong, official, however, it needs to be fertilized from below, 184
by 'lower' languages', whilst denying this relation of dependence.
The fertilization idea ushers in the more central one of money
(first as gold, then in its own right) and shit, and the many
equivalences of the two:
"... l'odeur de l'ordure dure oU l'or dort."185
In such a universe, a dialectic of two excremental visions exists:
"... un discours du riche qui associe le pauvre au vii, au
bas, a la corruption, en un mot la merde et un discours du
pauvre qui suspecte touj ours dans le luxe une corruption et
reconnait le riche a ce qu'il pue."185
The class-antagonistic nature of this relation should not obscure
the origins of both discourses in the money/anal complex. We have
already noted the role of sublimation in dealing with repressed anal
anxieties, and we can also pick up again the theme of guilt.
"Money is human guilt with the dross refined away till it is
a pure crystal of self-punishment; but it remains filthy
because it remains guilt."187
Though at another point Brown (citing Ferenczi) comes close to
contradicting this formulation,
"Money is the end result, which ... is seen to be nothing
other than odourless dehydrated filth that has been made to
shine. ,,188
the crucial fact is that though money be odourless and dehydrated,
this is not in itself sufficient to make it 'clean'.
We are constantly reminded of the ambivalence of money:
- 55 -
"... the assimilation of money with excrement does not render
money valueless ... If money were not excrement, it would
be valueless."189
Thus paradoxically, though money is a denial of excrement, a crys-
tallisation of anal sublimation, it is the primaeval repressed value
of shit that invests money with its worth.
"A new stage in the history of the money complex begins in
modern times, with the Reformation and the rise of capital-
ism. On the one hand definitive sublimation is attained by
a final repression of the awareness of the anal-erotic
sources of the complex: up till then the pursuit of money
appears to have been inhibited by the knowledge that lucre
is filthy ... And on the other hand there is a turn against
the sublimation, a withdrawal of libido from sublimation, a
desexualization of the sublimation itself."19
This latter point reinforces the observation made above (pg.33)
about the move in 'modern' sublimation towards a "death instinct".
Further,
"The psychology of pre-capitalist hoarding differs from that
of capitalist enterprise ... precisely in the fact that the
accumulation, the gold or the real estate, yielded bodily
satisfaction to the owner. True capitalism, on the other
hand, as Marx said, is destroyed in its very foundation if
we assume that its compelling motive is enjoyment instead of
accumulation of wealth."191
In keeping with the "need" for an ever greater centralisation of
the motors for reproducing capitalist ideologies, it is at least
arguable that the central orchestrator in social life since (approx-
imately) the 16th century has been the State. While in relation to
many modern debates about ideology we can say with Geoffrey Nowell-
Smith that
"... it is still not clear why the focus of these ideological
relations is the State unless one does what Althusser does,
which is to make the State the focus of ideological rela-
tions by definition. 192
(with reservations about his mechanistic reading of Althusser), it
is still at least useful to work with a definition suggested by
- 56 -
Nowell-Smith himself:
"The State is itself diffuse and its unity is always provi-
sional, shored up by the various discourses which concur to
assert it."193
The State may be described as the locus of reflection/dissemination
of a cluster of broadly "dominant" ideologies concerning the family,
the Church, communications, Law etc., always bearing in mind the
overdeterminations to which all such apparata are subject. What
this kind of definition stresses is the State's need to control
symbolic areas as well as material ones; hence the washing of
language, and the mechanisms analysed by Bourdieu. Hence a State
which
"'chie de l'argent' 	 inondant ses sujets de sea cadeaux,
version symbolise de la merde depose par le tyran."194
The State is, then, seen by Laporte as the new Master, a view which
has its possibilities provided the model is not used monolithically
or as part of a 'conspiracy thesis'.
Linked to the growing power of the State over the 16th and 17th
centuries were 'new' distinctions between public and private. As
Bakhtin points out,
"On the one hand the State encroached on festive life and
turned it into a parade; on the other hand these festivities
were brought into the home and became part of the family's
private life. ,,195
and another factor exacerbating this movement of the private into
the family and of the public into the State was the changing atti-
tudes to excrement hastened by edicts such as those of 1539 in Paris
and by other developments in the privatisation of excrement.
Privatisation of excrement is another 'effect' of the sublima-
tion of anality discussed above. The link between this sublimation
- 57 -
and privatisation on the one hand, and the primacy (according to
conventional psychoanalysis at least) of the phallus and socialisa-
tion on the other, is examined in some detail by Guy Hocquenghem.
"If phallic transcendence and the organization of society
around the great signifier are to be possible, the anus must
be privatized in individualized and oedipalised persons
The anus has no social position except sublimation. The
functions of this organ ... are the site of the formation of
the person. The anus expresses privatization itself."'"
That this has not always been so has been the contention of much of
this section. We have concentrated on some historical evidence and
sketched some of the psychoanalytic possibilities. For Hocquenghem,
"The great act of capitalist decoding is accompanied by the
constitution of the individual; money, which must be pri-
vately owned in order to circulate, is indeed connected with
the anus, insofar as the anus is the most private part of
the individual. The constitution of the private, individ-
ual, 'proper' person is 'of the anus', the constitution of
the public person is 'of the phallus'."-97
This seems to be a restatement of Deleuze and Guattari's position:
"Our modern societies have instead undertaken a vast privati-
zation of the organs, which corresponds to the decoding of
flows that have become abstract. The first organ to Buffer
privatization, removal from the social field, was the anus.
It was the anus that offered itself as a model for privati-
zation, at the same time as money came to express the flows'
new state of abstraction. Hence the relative truth of psy-
choanalytic remarks concerning the anal nature of monetary
economy. ,,198
To return to the link between money and shit, Laporte observes that
the State was/(has always been) above/outside finance:
'A"... c'est en dehors de lui - du moms Bur le theatre du sem-
blant - que se font lee affaires, que lee commerants remu-
ent la merde."199
and that insofar as the State was 'obliged' to come into contact
with money, the effect was to clean the money, to stamp it with a
200guarantee of cleanliness, the "non olet".
Shit and dirty money are thus both pushed into the private
sphere:
"Objet d'une politique, la merde se voit assignee etre une
chose privee, l'affaire de chaque , sujet, de chaque propriet-
aire depuis le lieu de discours ou s'incarnera l'autre terme
du couple binaire public-prive: L'Etat, le public."2"
Thus the cleanliness of the Paris streets was not the real issue in
the 1539 edict; rather it was the new relation of the individual to
her/his shit and to the State that was at stake.
"La disparition de l'objet-dechet est ici invoquee pour auto-
riser une transformation du rapport du sujet a sa merde qui
inclut ce rapport dans le lien de dependence ou il tombe a
l'egard de l'Etat absolu. .202
I cannot here examine the detailed exposition offered by Laporte;
for him the 16th century marked the beginning of the development of
State tyranny with respect to the individual subject, a tyranny
which he sees as
"... une extension infinie du
delirante faTon lee rapports
Immobile dans la position de
tous lea Bens du mot, comble
bouche." 203
public qui asseptise de la plus
sociaux pour maintenir le sujet
l'oie gave oi il se voit, dans
par l'Etat qui lui chie dans la
I referred above (pg.49) to the move from 'denial of bad shit'
towards a repressive mode. A lingering sign of the 'denial' mode in
the 19th century may have been the existence of a number of elabor-
ate treatises and calculation 2" concerned to argue the superior
land-fertilizing potential of human shit. Thus from about the
1830's,
"... attention was directed to the usefulness of rubbish. The
desire to recycle waste, in turn, stimulated olfactory
vigilance ... Most discussion on excrement concerned its
profitability ... Political economy evaluated excrement in
terms of profit and loss ... Parent-Duchatelet regarded the
export of excrement as one of the capital's great potential
resources ..."205
" the Search for profits led to the deodorisation of public
space more surely than the obsession with unhealthiness
n 206
Yet, this already represented a more alienated relation to bodily
functions and to humanity. Writing of these 'coprologists', Laporte
observes:
"L'utilitarisme forcene qu'ils deploient avec Bentham
l'endroit des fonctions physiologiques n'est pas sans lien
avec le rapport qu'ils entretiennent avec leur propre
ncorps. 207
The utilitarian impulse can indeed hare be seen as a symptom of the
bourgeois fear of loss, a vestige of the anxiety caused by the
irredeemability of that which is lost with evanescent odour. In
Alain Corbin's words,
"What disappeared or became volatile symbolized waste. The
ephemeral could not be accumulated. The loss was irremedi-
able. One could dream about recovering and reutilizing
waste or about recycling excrement: evaporation was beyond
hope. For the bourgeois there was something intolerable in
this disappearance of the treasured products of his
labour. "2"
In the light of the above, then, the changes in excremental
customs and attitudes and the role of 'official' language in rela-
tion to ideological work and power have at least a symptomatic
relationship with the development of capitalism, and perhaps in some
instances a determining one.
"Ce n'est donc pas par ,hasard qu'un systame scolaire, qui ...
entend faionner completement les habitue des classes popu-
laires, s'organise autour de l'inculcation d'un rapport avec
le langage (avec l'abolition des langues regionales etc.),
d'un rapport au corps (disciplines d'hygiene, de consomma-
tion, de sobriete etc.), et d'un rapport au temps (calcul,
economique, epargne etc.) .n209
"Leur discours, homogane a celui du capitalisme, n'est pas le
discours du capitalisme: il en est le sympt8me."21
The Comedic: Return of the repressed.
"Man alone suffers so excruciatingly that he was compelled to
invent laughter."
This section will seek to define some of the conceptual parame-
ters which will inform the textual and contextual studies to be
undertaken in the later sections.
The first subsection will deal with some of the key terms we
shall be using, with some of the potentially useful definitions of
comedy, and with the problematic relation between comedic pleasure
and other forms of pleasure. This will be followed by subsections
on the social, ideological and psychoanalytic functions which
comedy/humour can fulfil, and on the ways in which these functions
can interact. There will follow some consideration of specifically
obscene/excremental and grotesque comedy and, finally, a few notes
on the specificity of comedy in film/TV.
2.1 Defining terms, looking ahead. 
(i) Defining some terms.
The first task which imposes itself is to make some sense of the
variety of terms associated with the laughable: comedy, the comic,
humour, jokes, wit.
There exists a 'classical' notion of comedy, generally defined
in relation to "tragedy".
"Following Aristotle ... Cornford is able to say that if
tragedy requires plot first of all, comedy is rooted so
- 61 -
firmly in 'character', its plot seems derivative, auxiliary,
perhaps incidental."1
Such definitions and precepts tend to be very formal and to regard
comedy as a 'form' to which an 'artist' fits 'his' creation. It is
readily apparent that these are 'high-art' concepts which look down
upon the "semi-barbarism of merely giddy communities."2
There also exist, of course, more sophisticated, more detailed
examinations of 'comedy'. Important questions have been formulated:
"... whether 'what is comedy?' is in fact a question of crit-
ical theory, of psychology, of sociology or of metaphys-
ics."3
but more often than not (at least in my experience) the classical
notion of comedy has found it impossible to coexist with any ade-
quate model of psychology or sociology: Merchant immediately follows
the above lines with some short chapters cursorily dismissing these
disciplines before settling into some more comfortable armchair
literary criticism. We shall have occasion below to observe a much
more interesting approach to comedy4 similarly compromised by
simplistic dismissals of important work in psychology and related
areas.
This, then, is one idea of 'comedy' which will not be useful
here. Another awkward notion is that of the 'comic'.
Insofar as the distinction operated by Freud between jokes and
'the comic' will be of some concern to us below, the term needs to
be retained intact. The extension of its use to other contexts,
however, (i.e. as an adjective derived from 'comedy') tends to be
accompanied by connotations of 'second-rate comics', stand-up
- 62 -
comics, TV comics etc., and/or of 'childrens' comics'. The partisan
nature of the connotations is well indicated by Gershon Legman:
"Just as the murder-stories for use by frustrated adults are
politely euphemised as 'mysteries', just so the yearly half-
billion violence-leaflets for children are camouflaged as
'funnies', as 'comics', as 'jokes', though there is never
anything comical in them."5
I intend to evade these connotations by using the term 'comedic'
wherever possible (precedents include British Film Institute Summer
School material 1981 and subsequent BFI work in the area), which may
be defined as "having the property of producing, under at least some
specific circumstances, some comedic response." The word also
allows for the distinction between comedy in general or a particular
comedy, and 'comedicity', the state of an element defined as com-
edic.
The reference to Freud ushers in a further distinction, that
between comedy (or the comic) and humour. In formulating his
theoretical model of jokes and the comic he introduces his concep-
tion of humour as an additional or separate form of pleasure to be
distinguished from the other two:
"The pleasure in jokes has seemed to us to arise from an
economy in expenditure upon inhibition, the pleasure in the
comic from an economy in expenditure upon ideation (upon
cathexis), and the pleasure in humour from an economy in
expenditure upon feeling. 116 (original emphasis)
The idea appears in Freud's book to be something of an afterthought
and is not defined with anything approaching the customary rigour.
Mick Eaton makes this point, then comments upon Freud's later piece
('Humour', 1927):
"Again, Freud's writing on this topic is by no means uncon-
tradictory, for at the beginning of this short essay humour
is virtually synonymous with what he had earlier called 'the
comic', as is the joke."7
- 63 -
The point here is not so much the shift itself as the lack of
theoretical conviction. I shall employ the term as the 'largest'
category, to include jokes, the comic, and other possible subdivi-
sions.
"Comedy is part of the wider field of humour ... Comedy is
of particular interest to sociologists because comedy is
institutionalised humour."8
These terminological problems, it must be stressed, should not
be taken lightly: there are structural differences between jokes and
other instances of the comedic, the institutionalisation of comedy
'reflects' and contributes anew to particular social and cultural
formations. In addition to this there are problems arising from the
(necessarily) translated nature of Freud's work8 ; German words such
as 'Witz', 'witzig', 'die Komik', 'Scherz', 'Humor' do not translate
easily or directly into English, so the use of 'equivalents' in
English is beset with difficulties. The editor of the Pelican
translation ( cf. footnote 9 above) points out some of these hazards
but is then content to say
"It is much to be hoped that these difficulties, which are
after all only superficial ones, will not deter readers
  
The difficulties are surely far from superficial; they reflect
cultural differences which must be taken into account in any thor-
ough study of humour or the comedic.
Though this study can perhaps not lay claim to any thorough-
going analysis of Freud, one historically and culturally specific
aspect of his work does suggest itself. Among the categories which
Freud uses in describing jokes are the stupid/nonsensical and the
Aabsur.. 11 For him "moral backside" is absurd and is a "remarkable
- 64 -
epithet"; "breeches of respectability" is "an even more unusual
juxtaposition". Some lines from Heinrich Heine ('Romanzero', BkIII,
'HebrXische Melodien'), translated as
... Till at last
at last every button bursts
on my breeches of patience
are for Freud "similarly bewildering". 12 If Freud's remarks seem
strange to us now (?), the reasons may include the relative novelty
of such rhetorical figures in his day. The result is a set of
cultural assumptions which can vary drastically from writer to
writer, from one context to another, but which will necessarily
remain of a largely implicit nature.
Some sections of Freud's work on jokes, the comic and the
unconscious will be of particular use here, namely the sections
dealing with 'The purposes of jokes' (pp. 132-162), 'The mechanism
of pleasure and the psychogenesis of jokes' (pp. 165-190), and 'The
relation of jokes to dreams and to the unconscious' (pp. 215-138).
The mechanisms and 'technique' of jokes will not be considered in
any detail. Whilst Freud's distinction between jokes and 'the
comic' will not be used in the analysis presented here, (beyond some
considerations regarding the sites/'persons' necessary for a joke-
structure (cf. pp.141-144 below), it will nevertheless be necessary
to bear the distinction in mind when using his insights:
"We found ourselves obliged to locate the pleasure in jokes
in the unconscious; no reason is to be found for making the
same localisation in the case of the comic. On the con-
trary, all the analyses we have hitherto made have pointed
to the source of comic pleasure being the comparison between
two expenditures both of which must be ascribed to the pre-
conscious. Jokes and the comic are distinguished first and
foremost in their psychical localisation; the joke, it may
be said, is the contribution made to the comic from the
realm of the unconscious. 13 (original emphasis)
- 65 -
Let us return briefly to our (inclusive) category of comedy/the
comedic.
"To the extent that comedy is a mode of signification, it
shares aspects not only of the comic but also of the joke.
The issue then is the extent to which and the ways in which
comedy combines aspects of the comic and the joke, and the
extent to which and the ways in which it involves the two
different structures associated with them."14
To reiterate: while the distinction between jokes and 'the comic'
will not be of central concern, it will need to be borne carefully
in mind.
In the work which will (eventually) follow on the comedic in
relation to one particular Monty Python film, there will be an
essential need for some kind of "reception aesthetic", for a mode of
analysis of how and why specific subjects (or groups or subjects)
react to filmic elements, comedic or otherwise. The mode of analy-
sis will emerge at the ordained moment; let us first look at how the
comedic has hitherto been seen in relation to its conditions of
reception.
(ii) Defining the comedic.
"A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
Of him that makes it ..." (William Shakespeare, 'Love's
Labour's Lost' Act V Sc. 2)
What 'is' a jest? Can something be 'inherently funny'? Can the
comedic be defined in the abstract, in terms of its 'form' or of its
'content'? Henri Bergson explicitly defined his project (admittedly
a 'lay' piece) as a search for an "abstract formula" 15 to define
comedy. Freud himself strongly implies such an 'absolute':
"... there are cases in which the comic appears habitually
and as though by force of necessity, and on the contrary
- 66 -
others in which it seems entirely dependent on the circum-
stances and on the standpoint of the observer.ft16
and cautiously opines that
"the absolute comic exists only in exceptional circum-
stances." 17
There have been a great many attempts to 'define' comedy, characte-
rised often by titles such as 'The Essence of Comedy' (L.C.
Knights), 'The Argument of Comedy' (Northrop Frye), 'The Meaning of
Comedy' (James Feibleman) or 'Comedy: Meaning and Form' (Robert
Corrigan) .18 La Faye seems to stand out as an unusual theorist.
"His greatest originality as a humour theorist, over a period
of almost two decades, is probably his denial of the
existence of humour."19
Such curiosities notwithstanding, however, Chris Wilson's view
appears sound:
"Humour is everywhere, but seems to defy examination.
Theories of its nature seem facile or simplistic, and are
themselves laughable ... In repetitive, subjective origi-
nality, stale platitudes have been ref luxed as fresh
insights. ,,20
Whilst the bulk of the literature thus falls more or less into
the 'classical' camp, there have nevertheless been a number of
interesting observations made (often in passing) by specific writ-
ers. What follows is a selective sample of a very few of the more
pertinent insights concerning the mechanisms 'inherent' to the
comedic.
Among the brasher claims is that voiced by John Palmer.
"How shall we tell our reader that comedy, whatever the
tongue or the fashion of its delivery, is always comedy. n21
A more modest variant is furnished by Bergson:
"The comic spirit ... conjures up ... visions that are at
- 67 -
once accepted and understood by the whole of a social
group. .22
Bergson's central paradigm is one of mechanisation, of automatisa-
tion. For him comedy does not properly exist outside of the human,
and depends for its various manifestations on a number of (inge-
niously formulated) variants of "the mechanical encrusted on the
living", 23 the mechanical being strongly associated here with a kind
of unconsciousness:
"... a comic character is generally comic in proportion to
his ignorance of himself. The comic person is uncon-
scious.'.24
Unconscious use of the body then becomes 'comic':
"The attitudes, gestures and movements of the human body are
laughable in exact proportion as that body reminds us of a
mere machine ..." 25
"We laugh every time a person gives us the impression of
being a thing..26
- incidentally the source, for Bergson, of the comedic potential of
hypnotism and its effects. The notion of the mechanical is also
extended to actions and events:
"Any arrangement of acts and events is comic which gives us,
in a single combination, the illusion of life and the dis-
tinct impression of a mechanical arrangement."27
As Klaus Theweleit observes,
"As bourgeois individuals, we have been brought up to think
of ourselves as totalities, and unique ones at that. To
this bourgeois mind ... we cannot be anything like
'machines' ..." 28
Bergson's observations on the mechanisms of humour in many cases
have a ring of truth about them, and possess a definite heuristic
value - indeed they correlate surprisingly well with a number of
Freud's findings. The assumptions about 'society' betrayed by
Bergson, however, return us abruptly to square one:
"Laughter is simply the result of a mechanism set up in us by
- 68 -
nature, or, what is almost the same thing, by our long
acquaintance with social life."29
Among Bergson's formulations we find the following:
"A situation is invariably comic when it belongs simulta-
neously to two altogether independent series of events and
is capable of being interpreted in two entirely different
meanings at the same time."3
Whilst this is also very similar to Freud's writing on the joke-
technique of "multiple use of the same material" and "double mean-
ings", 31 the most startling comparison is with the model developed
by Arthur Koestler.32
In Koestler's view, a comic response can be expected when two
discourses (or modes of discourse) existing in two different
'planes' come together; in Samuel Johnson's words, "... the unex-
pected copulating of ideas."33
Koestler's model is a very elaborate one. He does not himself
use the term 'discourse', but defines the planes in which the ideas
or speech would exist in mathematical terms: the planes are
described as "matrices of thought" or as "matrices of behaviour", a
matrix being "any ability or pattern of ordered thought or behaviour
governed by the appropriate codes."34
Fig.1 Koestler's Bisociation Model 
- 69 -
"... the clash of the two mutually incompatible codes or
associative contexts explodes the tension ..."35
The name given by Koestler to this meeting of more or less incompa-
tible or surprising ideas/discourses is bisociation (cf. Fig.1).
His notion of energy discharge also has a Freudian ring:
"Sudden bisociation of a mental event with two habitually
incompatible matrices results in an abrupt transfer of the
train of thought from one associative context to another.
The emotive charge which the narrative carried cannot be so
transferred owing to its greater inertia and persistence;
discarded by reason, the tension finds its outlet in laugh-
ter."35
Koestler in fact goes on to analyse a number of varieties of humour:
he attempts to determine the two sets of matrices (the two planes)
and to identify the points at which bisociation occurs. Thus for
example,
"The pun is the bisociation of a single phonetic form with
two meanings - two strings of meaning tied together by an
acoustic knot."37
This is not the last we shall hear of Koestler's ingenious model; we
shall have cause to refer to is again. The idea of an "explosion of
laughter" as a product of bisociation, however, does beg the ques-
tion of how the moments of bisociation are to be determined in
practice.
The comedic can surely only ultimately be defined in relation to
some response evoked in the receiving subject. Though it is
obviously possible to define various 'textual' properties of the
comedic (the explicit project of Bergson and Koestler among many
others), an adequate definition of "comic response" would seem to be
a more serious problem.
"... each theory of comedy faces a double task: to account
for comic forms, i.e. the laws of comic discourse, literary/
dramatic/(filmic), and to account for the phenomenon of
laughter, and of course to relate the two. Perhaps, in dif-
- 70 -
ferent ways, each theory of comedy has shattered or dis-
tended itself on this double task. The more successful
theories, notably Freud's, tend to concentrate on one of the
tasks and ignore the other, though this entails incomplete-
ness."38
Here is a definition of the comedic which makes no claim to be
entertaining.
"Most commonly ... laughter is induced by the informational
content of stimulus patterns (external or internal) or pat-
terns of thought, containing several items of information in
particular kinds of juxtaposition or sequence."38
Laughter and smiling are clearly the most 'adequate' comic
responses. Yet it is quite obvious that 'comedy' frequently does
not evoke laughter at any level. Does this mean we are wrong to
call it comedy? We are reminded of our definition of the comedic
(pg.63 above), which includes the phrase "under at least some spe-
cific circumstances". This throws up the interesting question of
the history of laughter. There have been a number of claims that
laughter "is dead, dying, sick ..."; James Sully wrote lamenting
"the marginalization of 'gelasts' (laughers)". Anecdotes about
people dying of laughter and about prejudice against laughter
("habitual laughers are habitually ignorant, vulgar and unculti-
vated" - George Vasey 1875) indicate that the problem is not new."
A more ambitious study would need to take into account the 'objec-
tive' conditions of existence of social groupings (recently classes)
in particular historical conjunctures and look at the ideological
functions for which laughter is deployed.
In this sense 'the comedic', or 'a com(ed)ic element' is an
always-inadequate designation. It refers to a discursive element
which may (just remotely possibly? only for particular social
- 71 -
groupings? only for subjects in toxic states? almost certainly?)
evoke a comic response. Either there has to be some other defini-
tion of 'comic response' which goes beyond the phenomenological
surface of laughing/smiling, or else we have to accept that (theor-
etically) any discursive element may, under specific circumstances,
be decoded as comedic. The question then becomes (as it always
tends to anyway) how specific decodings are effected in determinate
situations.
Again a large number of attempts have been made to classify and
assess 'theories' of comedy/humour. One of the most concise appears
to be that of Patricia Keith-Spiegel, 41 which cuts across some of
the work being carried out here and which is worth a brief summary.
The principal types of theory in her classification include:
1. Biological, instinct and evolution theories: utilitarian
purpose of laughter, humour as vestige of adaptive behav-
iour.
2. Superiority theories: origins in Aristotle, Plato, ela-
tion of favourable comparison with regard to others less
fortunate, Hobbes. Freud's awareness of this.
3. Incongruity theories: humour arising from ill-suited
pairings of ideas/situations. Bergson cited as example.
(Koestler also seems to fit here).
4. Surprise theories: Suddenness or unexpectedness as impor-
tant in much humour. Links with incongruity theory.
5. Ambivalence theories: Laughter as result of incompatible
feelings or emotions (as opposed to ideas or perceptions
which are basis of incongruity theories).
6. Release and Relief theories: (e.g. Klein) Release of ten-
sion which 'controlled thinking' cannot control, humorous
experience as "alleviating the strain involved in sus-
tained attention".
7. Configurational theories: coming-together of originally
unrelated elements. 'Falling into place' or 'sudden
insight' as source of amusement. Jerry Palmer's 'peripe-
teia.
- 72 -
8. Psychoanalytic theories: especially Freud; economy of
psychic energy.
This is not the place to attempt any more extended exposition or
critique of such a classification. We can simply note in passing
the most apparent kinship between 'release and relief theories' and
'psychoanalytic theories', and between 'incongruity', 'surprise',
'ambivalence' and 'configurational' theories. There is also a link
between the 'superiority' idea and Freud's work, as we shall see
below. Indeed it is the psychoanalytic orientation which will be
favoured here, with some consideration also given to the kind of
incongruity theory favoured by Koestler.
Returning, then, to the question posed above (pg.66), it would
appear that though it may be possible to identify some of the
structural characteristics of typically comedic elements, it is not
possible to assert that any element (joke, gag, sketch, line) is
'inherently' or 'immanently' comedic. The more important factor is
the specific context which confers comedicity; this context includes
the production of the putatively comedic element (Freud's analysis
of one of Heine's jokes in the light of the latter's family back-
ground/psychology is a good example of such an approach 42 ) and the
social and psychoanalytic context in which the element is received
and decoded.
The categories of the social, ideological and psychoanalytic
will serve to define much of the work which follows, particularly
that of section 2.2. It may be useful at this point, however, to
dispose (temporarily) of a problem raised by the above references to
laughter. Is it possible to distinguish between comedic/humorous
- 73 -
pleasure and other forms of pleasure, and how will this affect our
definition of the comedic?
(iii) Pleasure.
"A cheerful mood, whether it is produced endogenously or tox-
ically, reduces the inhibiting forces, criticism among them,
and makes accessible once again sources of pleasure which
were under the weight of suppression."43
In fact this area is a vast one which can be tackled at a number
of levels of varying complexity/abstruseness. 44 A convenient
starting-point is probably the pre-symbolic phase in which Freud's
pleasure-principle dominates: the time of life when the infant
experiences its body simultaneously as fragmented and as unified
with (usually) the mother, when pleasures are directly sensorial,
untroubled by the guilts and repressions of socialisation. As the
small child 'plays', notably working out its own versions of the
"fort-da game", it learns new pleasures:
"... pleasurable effects, which arise from the repetition of
what is similar, a rediscovery of what is familiar, similar-
ity of sound etc... .45
Freud's original description of the fort-da game (fort=away,
da=there) involved a small child using a cotton-reel with a piece of
string tied to it to throw away the reel whilst uttering "ooh" (an
attempt at "fort"), then to pull it back again with the string
whilst uttering a "joyful" "da". The child would repeat this
exercise many times on a number of occasions." Leaving aside the
problem of linguistic specificity (have similar observations been
carried out with, say, English-'speaking' infants, and if so, what
do they "say" instead of "ooh" and "da"?), it does seem to be the
case that the game represents a gaining of psychic 'control' over
- 74 -
the repeated absences of the mother. Of course if a cotton-reel
conveniently tied to a piece of string is not to hand, some other
game can easily be found as a 'coping' mechanism to compensate for
the mother's absence. Indeed games such as hide-and-seek and,
later, chasing games, can easily be seen as variants of this early
coping mechanism.
The significance of this early play with presence and absence
for a Lacanian 'model' is summarized very succinctly by Anika
Lemaire:
"In a first act of symbolisation, the child removes himself
from the urgency of an event - his mother's disappearance
and reappearance - by replacing it with a symbol:- the
appearance and disappearance of the reel ... By their alter-
nation, the two phonemes ... will in turn symbolise the dis-
appearance and reappearance of the reel. The distancing of
the lived experience is effected in two stages: the child
moves from the mother to the reel and finally to language
... Such an experience may be considered the inaugural
moment of all future displacement, all metaphors and all
language."47
Since also
"Pleasure is always defined by Freud as the sensation marking
the end of a state of tension. .48
it follows that for pleasure to be repeated a new tension has to be
produced (the cotton-reel has to be 'lost' again). The installation
of repetition as pleasurable thus also inaugurates a circulation of
desire, this last being progressively defined in relation to various
sets of signifiers in a manner which need not be of concern to us
here. The signified is ultimately inaccessible to language, life in
symbolisation is an inescapable relay of signifiers, and
"As Lacan would say, no-one can in fact say "I enjoy (je
jouis)" ('jouir' also has the slang meaning 'to come'
-transl. note) unless he or she is referring to past plea-
sure or pleasure to come, because as soon as he or she
begins to speak, the subject ceases to enjoy (jouir) in the
- 75 -
true sense, or, what amounts to the same thing, ceases to be
annulled as subject."49
We have, then, (for better or worse) a way of theorising the
pleasure of repetition. Anticipating some work on joke-structure
below, we find that
"The joke and the fort/da both involve 'the use of language
and a certain pleasure in repetition'. Both involve also
'the loss of object that defines the structure of desire'.
And both involve an aggression against the absent object as
a corollary of the desire to master its absence ..."
If Freud has got it right, then, joke-telling is a displaced re-
enactment of the trauma of the absent object, of the absent mother.
Indeed he himself was inclined to the opinion that
"... the subjective determinants of the joke-work are not far
removed from those of neurotic illness 51
We can also note in passing that Bergson, who in most respects
appears to have been quite oblivious to the notion of the uncon-
scious being developed by his contemporary Freud, nevertheless
accurately pinpointed the origin of much comedy in the childlike
pleasure of repetition, and even devoted several pages to a consid-
eration of specific games and toys and the parallels with comedy. We
find a reference to
"... a spring of a moral type, an idea first expressed, then
repressed, then expressed again ...
and another reference to 'repression':
"In a comic repetition of words we generally find two terms:
a repressed feeling which goes off like a spring, and an
idea that delights in repressing the feeling anew."99
The compulsion to repeat has another, broader relation to the
comedic, that of the repetition of successful 'formulae', for
instance in jokes ("Mummy, mummy ... shut up and ..." or "What do
- 76 -
you call a 7"), in the repetition of comedic characters/
stereotypes in books, films, TV series etc., or in generic/
structural/institutional aspects of TV sitcom, music-hall etc. If
we recall Koestler's bisociation model, we may say with him that
"... the mediocre cartoonist and other professional craftsmen
of the comic operate mostly with the same familiar matrices,
fixed at a given angle ... governed by familiar rules of the
game ... and their task is reduced to devising new
links:-puns, gags, pegs for parody. It is a mechanised kind
of bisociative technique."54
We shall touch upon the infantile origins of the comedic again
below; let us for the moment pursue a little further the notion of
repetition. Another way of describing the infant's retrieval of the
cotton-reel in the above 'game' is as the rediscovery of what is
familiar. When, through entry into symbolisation and rationalized
thought-processes, the child begins to recognize and to remember,
the same 'game' is effectively being replayed.
"In view of the close connection between recognizing and
remembering it is not rash to suppose that there may also be
a pleasure in remembering - that the act of remembering is
in itself accompanied by a feeling of pleasure of similar
origin."55
It is clear that the pleasures of recognition and remembering play
an important part in most aspects of human life, and that in film
and TV 'comedy' such pleasures are intimately mingled with other
properly 'comedic' pleasures. This idea was not new when it was
used in a 1970 episode of I'm Sorry I'll Read That Again:
"... Bill Oddie demonstrates, quite independently, a theory
which Spike Milligan had also evolved some nineteen years
earlier in The Goon Show - that an audience will laugh at
anything, no matter how meaningless, if it is only repeated
often enough. The cast sets out to do this with the work
A clear parallel of this is the repeated use of particular names/
place-names in the course of a particular TV comedy series, the
- 77 -
mention of one of which is in itself calculated to evoke amusement.
Neasden, Purley, and Des O'Connor are among many to have suffered
this fate.
Further, repeated viewing of a favourite programme or film is
clearly often a source of pleasure; other factors such as group
reinforcement are relevant here, but the psychic mechanism remains
in place. When Monty Python's 'Dead Parrot' sketch was originally
recorded for TV,
"the reaction all this gets from the original audience is
quite good, but nothing compared with later stage perfor-
mances where the sketch was noisily hailed as an old friend
and got hysterical reactions all the way through."57
Both on TV and on stage the recognition of a favourite performer/
group is also clearly pleasurable. During a live performance of
some of the Monty Python TV material at Drury Lane in 1974,
"Cleese was puzzled by the reactions of the audience - they
would applaud a sketch upon recognizing it, laugh a moderate
amount through it, and then clap and cheer enthusiastically
at the end. It began to make sense when he realized that
the show was really the equivalent of a pop concert, and
that the audience were celebrating the performance of old
favourites. 58
The recognition of a favourite comedian certainly contributes to a
"... favourable effect ... produced by an expectation of the
comic ... being attuned to comic pleasure."9
and Freud is also correct in identifying the enjoyment of repeated
laughter:
"In the last resort it is in the recollection of having
laughed and in the expectation of laughing that he laughs
when he sees the comic actor come onto the stage, before the
latter can have made any attempt at making him laugh."8
Yet we must not forget that another kind of pleasure, that of
recognition/remembering, is independent of the comedic.
We can tentatively go a little further still and note that
intellectual activity itself, indeed thought as such, has been seen
by a number or writers as holding hidden pleasures:
"If we do not require our mental apparatus at the moment for
supplying one of our indispensable satisfactions, we allow
it itself to work in the direction of pleasure from its own
activity ... As regards joking ... it is an activity which
alms at deriving pleasure from mental processes, whether
intellectual or otherwise."61
In another place Freud writes that the desire for knowledge is at
bottom an offshoot, sublimated and raised to the intellectual
sphere, of the possessive instinct.
"Knowing the truth, understanding, is certainly a major
source of pleasure."62
This tendency towards mastery, towards an unconditional control and
knowledge of desire, can tip over into the perverse:
"... the desire to know and to investigate are not entirely
unproblematic; when an intellectual process is shown and
examined it enters immediately into the sexual fantasy of
infantile investigation ... in their extreme form slide from
epistemology into epistemophilia (the concept denoting the
perversion of the desire to know)."63
The fundamental nature of these intellectual/possessive pleasures
can, as we have already noted (pg.38), be seen as anal. This origin
does not necessarily concern us at the moment, but the existence of
such other pleasures does. The analysis of the comedic in Monty
Python films will be complicated not only by the pleasures of
recognition" and repetition, but by the pleasures of intellectual
'play'. Monty Python films (and even more so the TV programmes and
derivatives) are littered with literary, aesthetic and other refer-
ences: for example the discussion of swallows' ability to carry
coconuts in Monty Python and the Holy Grail, the begging and
bartering sequences in Monty Python's Life of Brian, and the
references to Nietzsche in The Meaning of Life. The pleasure to be
- 79 -
obtained from these sequences/films - and this applies also to the
surreal/absurdist undertow present in all of them - requires a
particular kind of cultural capital on the part of the viewing
subject. Assumptions about the likely audience are exemplified by
the final line of the 'Foreword' of the Meaning of Life book:
"... and remember, if you're not completely satisfied with
this book after you've thoroughly perused its contents then
you're stupid and worthless."p5
Another example occurs in a Monty Python TV sketch which is 'inter-
rupted' and stopped by the Graham Chapman colonel character; as the
sketch disintegrates, Terry Jones says "the general public's not
going to understand this, are they?"
This notion of cultural capital will be of some importance when
we come to look at specific audience responses to Meaning of Life,
indeed also when we come to look at some of the textual strategies
deployed (mockery, superiority, incongruity) in the field of the
comedic.
Let us note that our model of pleasure is by no means the only
one possible. In what appears (to me) as a "retreat from theory", a
mark of frustration, a number of French (and latterly British)
thinkers/writers have affirmed a re-reading of Nietzsche in develop-
ing the notion of the "libidinal body", of "libidinal economy". 66
"Maybe indeed the deeper subject is here; not 'pleasure' but
the libidinal body itself, and its peculiar politics, which
may well move in a realm largely beyond the 'pleasurable' in
that narrow, culinary bourgeois sense."67
The critique of psychoanalysis and Marxism may be timely and
necessary, but the reduction to undifferentiated pluralism which the
- 80 -
'new' philosophy seems sometimes to encourage should be no substi-
tute for a properly materialist incentive. One such critique does
seem to have kept at least one foot on materialist ground and has
already been referred to a number of times, and is worth a detour
here since it serves to situate a number of the psychoanalytic
notions running through this thesis. This is Deleuze and Guattari's
'Anti-Oedipus'. We have already noted Campioni and Gross's work on
the specificity of Freudian psychoanalytic concepts (pp.42-45
above); Deleuze and Guattari furnish a much more fundamental cri-
tique of the nature of the psychoanalytic project and of its place
in the perpetuation of the Oedipal tyranny. For them, the 'real'
material unconscious is outside (or rather beneath) ideology; it
does not mean anything, it is beyond representation, does not
signify; "it is an orphan" 68 ; it functions rather through a more or
less infinite series of desiring-machines and partial objets, which
are in principle infinitely adaptable/flexible. Their possibilities
are evoked by Bruckner and Finkielkraut:
"A la bipartition classique du haut et du bas, du noble et du
bestial, sachons substituer un poudroiement oU le sexe, la
ttte et lea bras ne soient cheque fois jamais la mtme chose
degageons-nous de la croyance au fonctionnel, au naturel
(la bouche peut Stre tin sexe, le sexe tine bouche, le Cu].
machine a avaler ...) et plus de recentrement sournois mais
une partialisation a l'infini. Coupons, coupons dans la
belle totalite de l'organisme ..."6
Having elucidated a more or less original model of unconscious
processes, Deleuze and Guattari unfold their twofold project.
The first part of this is to analyse how the freely producing
unconscious has been progressively enslaved by the Earth, by the
Despot and by Capital.
"Desire institutes a libidinal investment of a State machine
that overcodes the territorial machine, and with an addi-
- 81 -
tional turn of the screw, represses the desiring-
machines.""
Instrumental in this process are a number of classical psychoana-
lytic terms, to which Deleuze and Guattari return insistently. The
move to representation and signification is central:
"From the moment desire is made to depend on the signifier,
it is put back under the yoke of a despotism whose effect is
castration, there where one recognizes the stroke of the
signifier itself; but the sign of desire is never signify-
ing, it exists in the thousands of productive break-flows
that never allow themselves to be signified within the unary
stroke of castration."71
The abundant flows of the productive unconscious have little chance
when faced with the phallus.
"For the phallus has never been either the object or the
cause of desire, but is itself the castrating apparatus, the
machine for putting lack into desire, for drying up all the
flows, and for making all the breaks from the outside and
from the Real into one and the same break with the outside,
with the Real." 72 (original emphasis)
Klaus Theweleit describes some of the flows which are dried up:
"At some point, his bodily fluids must have been negativised
to such an extent that they became the physical manifesta-
tion of all that was terrifying. Included in this category
were all of the hybrid substances that were produced by the
body and flowed on, in, over and out of the body; the floods
and stickiness of sucking kisses; the swamps of the vagina,
with their slime and mire; the pap and slime of male semen;
the film of sweat that settles on the stomach, thighs and in
the anal crevice, and that turns two pelvic regions into a
subtropical landscape; the slimy stream of menstruation; the
damp spots wherever bodies touch; the warmth that dissolves
bodily boundaries ... Also the floods of orgasm; the
streams of semen, the streams of relaxation flowing through
the musculature, the streams of blood from bitten lips, the
sticky wetness of hair soaked with sweat. And all the flow-
ing delights of infancy: the warm piss-stream running down
naked legs; the mire and pulp of fresh shit in the infant's
diapers, the fragrant warmth that lets the body expand, the
milk-stream from the mother's breast, the smacking of lips
on the comforter, the sweet pap that spreads over hands and
face, the sucking on a never-ending thumb, the good-tasting
stream of snot running from the nose into the mouth, not to
mention the liberating stream of hot tears that turns a mask
into a pulp and then a face again."73
Thus castration and the installation of lack become crucial to
- 82 -
anthropomorphic (as opposed to polymorphously-perverse) sexuality,
and desire itself becomes (re)defined within these parameters:
"From the structure there arises the most austere song in
honour of castration,- yes, yes, we enter the order of
desire through the gates of castration - once desiring-
production has spread out in the space of representation
that allows it to go on living only as an absence and a lack
unto itself. For a structural unity is imposed on the desi-
ring-machines that joins them together in a molar aggregate;
the partial objects are referred to a totality that can
appear only as that which the partial objects lack ..."74
The whole edifice is supported by the Oedipal triangulation, the
derisory 'mummy-daddy-me' within which the drama of a displaced
desire is played out and within which contemporary human sexuality
is trapped, the "dirty little familial secret." Crucially, for
Deleuze and Guattari, Oedipus is a displaced object of repression
which conceals that which is really being repressed.
"... the general social repression-psychic repression system
gives rise to an Oedipal image as a disfiguration of the
repressed. The fact that this image in turn suffers a
repression ... such is the long history of our society. But
the repressed is not first of all the Oedipal representa-
tion. What is repressed is desiring-production. It is the
part of this production that does not enter into social pro-
duction or reproduction. It is what would introduce disor-
der and revolution into the socius, the noncoded flows of
desire."75
"Indeed, this is how social repression prolongs itself by
means of a psychic repression without which it would have no
grip on desire. What is desired is the intense germinal or
germinative flow, where one would look in vain for persons
or even functions discernible as father, mother, son, sister
etc., since these names only designate intensive variations
on the full body of the earth ..."76
As we have indicated (pp.37 & 43 above), the conditions for such
psychoanalytic configurations have not always been so favourable:
"But the mother as the simulacrum of territoriality, the
father as the simulacrum of the despotic law, with the
slashed, split, castrated ego, are the products of capital-
ism insofar as it engineers an operation that has no equiva-
lent in the other social formations."77
Deleuze and Guattari's second chief aim is to oppose psychoana-
lysis in its collusion with capital.
"... the tie linking psychoanalysis with capitalism is not
merely ideological; it is infinitely closer, infinitely
tighter; ... psychoanalysis depends directly on an economic
mechanism (whence its relation with money) through which the
decoded flows of desire, as taken up in the axiomatic of
capitalism, must necessarily be reduced to a familial field
where the operation of the axiomatic is carried out."78
It is then within this familial field that psychoanalysis sets up
its stall; Oedipus takes on the ideological function of legitimating
both a social formation and the family as agent of social reproduc-
tion.
"... social repression needs psychic repression precisely in
order to form docile subjects and to ensure the reproduction
of the social formation, including its repressive struc-
tures."78
Though Deleuze and Guattari seem for the most part to work with a
relatively crude conception of 'ideology', formulations such as the
above are close to the sense of Althusser (cf. pg.131 below), and
the unconscious imaginary relation through which reality is ideolog-
ized in Hirst's appropriation of Althusser is nicely paralleled in
Deleuze and Guattari's view of psychoanalysis:
"Psychoanalysis states clearly that unconscious representa-
tion can never be apprehended independently of the deforma-
tions, disguises and displacements it undergoes .80
It is precisely this 'false' 'ideological' version of the uncon-
scious which Deleuze and Guattari are concerned to overturn, with
the aid of the radical process of schizoanalysis. The objective
would be to redefine and re-experience desire outside the familiar
familialist triangle.
"Yet what was the other direction, glimpsed for a moment by
Freud apropos of the familial romance, before the Oedipal
trapdoor slams shut? ... Wouldn't the Great Other, indis-
pensable to the position of desire, be the social other,
social difference apprehended and invested as the nonfamily
within the family itself? The other class is by no means
- 84 -
grasped by the libido as a magnified or impoverished image
of the mother, but as the foreign, the nonmother, the nonfa-
ther, the nonfamily, the index of what is nonhuman in sex,
and without which the libido would not assemble its desi-
ring-machines." 81 (original emphasis)
Precisely defined, schizoanalysis would have two stages:
"... the destruction of the expressive pseudo-forms of the
unconscious, and the discovery of desire's unconscious
investments of the social field."82
And destruction is exactly what Deleuze and Guattari mean:
"Destroy, destroy. The task of schizoanalysis goes by way of
destruction - a whole scouring of the unconscious, a com-
plete curettage. Destroy Oedipus, the illusion of the egos
the puppet of the superego, guilt, the law, castration."u3
"Shit on your whole mortifying, imaginary and symbolic
theatre. What does schizoanalysis ask? Nothing more than a
bit of a relation to the outside, a little real reality. And
we claim the right to a radical laxity, a radical incompe-
tence - the right to enter the analyst's office and say it
smells bad there. It reeks of the great death and the
little ego." 84 (original emphasis)
The radical new form of analysis would open the window, dispel the
smell, and begin to de-Oedipalise the unconscious in order to
liberate the flows on the primaeval-anoedipal body without organs.
The desiring-machines, condemned in capitalism to representational-
ity and to antiproduction,
"... representation was substituted for the units of produc-
tion of the unconscious; and an unconscious that was capable
of nothing but expressing itself - in myth, tragedy,
dreams,- was substituted for the productive unconscious."85
would come to life and return to their full polyvocal unsignifying
productivity:
"One then reaches the region of a productive, molecular,
micrological or microphysical unconscious that no longer
means or represents anything."86
The bipolar sexual model so suited to the Oedipal configuration
would be dissolved87 in favour of a polyvalent use of desiring-
machines:
"schizoanalysis is the variable analysis of the n sexes in a
subject, beyond the anthropomorphic representation that
society imposed on this subject, and with which it repre-
sents its own sexuality. The schizoanalytic slogan of the
desiring-revolution will be first of all: to each its own
sexes." 88
It is interesting in this context to note Python Graham Chapman's
reported view of sex-roles:
"Maybe ... you shouldn't treat children as being different
sexes at all. I think that's the ideal situation, actually,
because children aren't different sexes, and neither, for
that matter are adults. In my experience, going to bed with
a man and going to bed with a woman is totally similar -
absolutely totally similar."89
Perhaps he doesn't need schizoanalysisl
The 'real' unconscious would return, the material unconscious
beneath ideology, an unconscious provocatively shematized by Deleuze
and Guattari:
"... an unconscious that is material rather than ideological;
schizophrenic rather than Oedipal; nonfigurative rather than
imaginary; real rather than symbolic; machinic rather than
structural ... molecular, microphysical and micrological
rather than molar or gregarious; productive rather than
expressive. 9O
The result, not surprisingly, would be a revolutionary transfor-
mation of the individual; with the dissolution of the ego and its
Oedipal baggage the libidinal economy would function for the sake of
functioning.
"We use the term 'libido' to designate the specific energy of
desiring-machines; and the transformations of this energy
... are never desexualisations or sublimations."91
Gone from the libidinal 'economy' would be notions of gain, profit,
perhaps of value. Gone also would be the need for any more or less
Freudian model of the comedic as economising-machine. Were the
desiring-flows to be liberated in the way described by Deleuze and
- 86 -
Guattari, there would be no stratification of levels of conscious-
ness, no repression, no anxiety to be displaced/sublimated, no
neurosis.
If the arguments of Deleuze and Guattari at first seem anti-
materialist and obscurantist, I think they are ultimately clear and
convincing. Of course there are always loose ends, unresolved
ambiguities, but if we take their own definition of materialist
psychiatry as
"... the psychiatry that introduces the concept of production
into considerations of the problem of desire."92
then their contribution is at least as cogent as the attempt to
marry Marxism and psychoanalysis of, say, Althusser or Coward and
Ellis.93
The merits of their work apart, however, the fact is that in our
particular conjuncture, though we can take on board Deleuze and
Guattari's critique of the Oedipal and of its crucial servicing role
with regard to capitalism, though we may see the polemic validity of
the freedom-through-schizoanalysis thesis, we are (subjugated)
subjects who do operate within ideology; we inhabit psychic
structures (more or less firmly under the yoke of Oedipus) which it
is still correct to speak of with a vocabulary of repression,
sublimation and so on. Deleuze and Guattari's 'Anti- Oedipus' can
therefore serve to check a use of Freudian and Lacanian psychoana-
lytic theory which could otherwise risk complacency and lack of
critical distance.
Having defined some of the concepts we shall be dealing with and
looked forward obliquely to some of the likely problems, then, we
can take a closer look at some of the functions of the comedic.
2.2 Social, ideological and psychoanalytic functions of the comedic.
(i) Social/ideological functions.
For the purposes of this overview it will be convenient to
identify four kinds of functions fulfilled by the comedic, though
little time will be spent on the more biologistic approaches. As
will become clear, also, only one of these function will be consid-
ered in any detail; insofar as the other three arguably have some
effectivity, however, they will be introduced, albeit more briefly.
First there are the biologistic approaches. There is clearly
something to be learnt from studies of, say, group behaviour of
animals and the ways in which this is related to facial expressions
resembling smiles or laughter. Lorenz and Eibl-Eibesfeldt have
carried out work on 'pack' behaviour in other animals and believe
that 'laughter' can serve cohesive and aggressive purposes within a
group. Andrew and Ludovici have done work on teeth-baring and other
facial expressions in 'primitive animals' and primates to try to
establish a link with 'patterns of dominance'. For others, laughter
and humour are in some way products of evolution; the laugh's
message is: "I recognise that the danger is not real."94
This approach can then be linked to the possible physical benefits
of laughter: the benefits claimed for laughter have in the past
included:
- 88 -
"... restoring homeostasis, stabilizing blood pressure,
oxygenating the blood, massaging vital organs, stimulating
circulation, facilitating digestion ..."9
Whilst some of these avenues might well be worth investigating, and
while biologistic determinants must have some part to play in
laughter and the comedic, this would constitute too great a digres-
sion at this point.
Secondly we have the postulation of 'innocent' comedy or 'play'
which produces playful, non-aggressive laughter. This mode of
comedicity is developed in the work of Richard Boston and Max
Eastman among others, and is in part a reaction against Freud's
insistence on the aggressive nature of all humour ("harmless jokes
are not funny"). Thus for Boston laughter fulfils a dual function:
playful/pleasurable as well as aggressive/socially corrective. These
writers imply that this particular (playful) mode of the comedic has
no social function. Now whether this socially innocent mode exists
or not is not a question to be pursued here (though in view of what
will be said about 'absurd' humour, examples from Monty Python will
have to be considered); it is arguable that this mode does coexist
with other mode(s) even in one comedic element. What it is impor-
tant to avoid, however, is naive obliviousness to the unconscious or
to the ideological, evident for instance in Eastman's description of
naive laughter at 'deformity'; in discussing deliberate distortion
of words (Milt Gross), Eastman ignores the ideological function of
use/misuse of language/spelling/convention. His mirth over misspel-
lings such as "tords" and "snaick" is based on an unacknowledged
position of superiority" with respect to cultural capital, to
class. And when Boston and Eastman do recognize the socially
corrective function, they entirely depoliticize it:
- 89 -
"It is the fact that comic laughter as such is not corrective
work but aimless play that makes laughter which is correc-
tive such a tireless weapon and a cleansing broom."97
The third and rather more important function for our purposes is
the 'conflict function'. Comedy operating in this mode functions as
a genuine critique:
"Humour is the pin that punctures balloons of pomposity and
pretentiousness. 98
"Getting people to laugh at those in a position of power
does, to a certain extent, undermine their authority. Laugh-
ter has the effect of 'desanctifying' them and the institu-
tions they represent, and this is half way to getting people
to actually attack them."
There are also more romantic formulations of the oppositional
impulse:
"Que l'humour soit une r6volte, ii suffit pour s'en con-
vaincre d'examiner la liste des imprisonnements et des con-
damnations dont il a 6t4 le grand responsable. L'humour a
sea hgros, sea martyrs. Ii est un refus. Ii peut devenir
The comedian will then find (him)self "on the side of the revolu-
tionaries."'m The usual time-honoured tools for oppositional
comedy/humour are caricature, satire and irony, and some writers,
notably Richard Boston, ascribe a subversive function to the Fool or
Trickster who breaks down conventional barriers such as wisdom/
folly, rule/disorder. At this level of generality perhaps as good
as any is Allan Rodway's definition:
"Comedy can be thought of as a particular mode - at least
slightly genial - of mocking propaganda for or against some
desiderated norm. ,,]02
There have been and are many instances of undoubtedly conflictual
comedy/humour, effectively kicking against some well-chosen target.
It is broadly true that
"At times of conflict, humour serves to express agreement and
to strengthen the morale of those who are present and to
- 90 -
undermine the morale of those against which it is aimed.103
It should however be evident that a great many examples of puta-
tively oppositional humour do not fulfil a conflict function. It is
not enough for the film-maker(s) to wish to make a critical film, it
is not enough for the working class to be represented on screen, it
is not enough to accept the widespread abuse of the term 'satire'.
If the definition furnished by Chris Wilson
". .. use of ridicule ... in speech or writing for the osten-
sible purpose of exposing and discouraging vice and folly
... Add the qualification that, in a pluralistic society,
'vice' and 'folly' are defined by the joker. Satire is rid-
icule of behaviour or attitudes of which the joker disap-
proves."104
appears to be fairly broad, a more nuanced range of possibilities is
provided by Max Eastman, who identifies four forms of satire, with
varying degrees of bite:
a) an attack which is so broad and heavy-handed that anyone
feeling attacked clearly lacks a sense of humour (East-
man's example is of someone named Smith taking offence at
a "Smith-rolling machine").
b) a playful attack which also entertains the 'victim'.
C) a still "kidding" attack, but with "a bottom of fury to
(his) fun"
d) not kidding at all; outright attack.105
Considering this 'spectrum', Eastman's notion of "good satire" is a
little odd; it does not involve attack at all, but treats the butt
of the satire with contempt, destroying it by not taking it
seriously. While this is offered by Eastman as the most effective
form of satire, Wilson's very similar formulation seeks to define
the very nature of satire:
"Satire, in contrast, seems entirely unflattering. The joker
abuses his victim, then presents him as laughable or absurd
- beneath the bother of serious contempt. Satire would seem
a potent tool of abuse, being simultaneously disparaging and
dismissive. "1"
- 91 -
Whilst many films may at moments contain conflictual/
oppositional elements, many of these are in any case 'recuperated'
and also fulfil a quite other function. One way in which a poten-
tially critical or conflictual element can be compromised is when
one individual (or relatively few individuals) is satirised, mocked
or derided as a representative of a class, institution or system,
and the structures responsible for the object of attack are left
uncriticised. This has been true in a large number of films (this
does not only refer to 'comedies') in which the presence of star
protagonists and narrative structure prevent an adequate reflection
on the issues involved. I have argued elsewhere, for example, (cf.
footnote 1 of the introduction above) that in the Boulting broth-
ers' I'm All Right Jack the caricatures of corrupt management are
thus compromised. The wit of the script, recognition of well-loved
actors playing the villains, and the quality of the playing itself
conspire to conceal the absence of any potentially trenchant cri-
tique of management manipulation of industrial relations. A looph-
ole is left for the argument that the caricatured, ludicrous and/or
condemned figures are exceptions, and such films lose much of their
critical bite.
Though it may be that the 'conflict function' has been accorded
relatively little space here, some further considerations of its
potential will punctuate the next subsection.
Finally, then, let us turn to the 'control function'. Though
Gerald Mast107 has identified a development form a 19th century
identification of "society" with "nature" (incidentally a signifi-
cant determinant in Bergson's 'Le Rire') to a 20th century tendency
- 92 -
towards polarization of these two categories accompanied by the
emergence of the anti-hero and a more critical climate, it is still
true to Bay that the vast bulk of comedy, as of all cultural prod-
uct, functions to reinforce existing structures.
There are a number of mechanisms (which will not be considered
in any detail here) by which, as numerous writers in the cultural
field have suggested, filmic representations function to produce/
reproduce certain subject-positions, to reinforce the individual
viewer's relation to a set of dominant ideologies. Thus the use of
establishing shots, shot-reverse-shot sequences, together with
conventions such as "not crossing the line" etc. serve to construct
a believably coherent (though illusory) space. Through narrative
enigma and various forms of 'punctuation' (dissolves signalling
flashback, fades implying ellipsis, cutting on action enabling
subtle mini-ellipses) an artificial but, again, believable sense of
time is produced. The setting-up and resolution of narrative
enigmas themselves involve a relation to knowledge which tends to
keep the spectator in a position of dependency.
"The whole process is directed towards the place of a reader:
in order that it should be intelligible, the reader has to
adopt a certain position with regard to the text. This
position is that of homogeneity, of truth..108
There is an interplay of 'looks' between film protagonists and,
perhaps more importantly, between spectator and protagonist (shot-
reverse-shot figures also play a part here), which tends to bind the
spectator into either a fetishistic or identification-orientated
(but in any case voyeuristic) relation to the image. Conducive to
this operation in particular are the usual viewing conditions in a
cinema: a degree of solitude, darkness, a relatively large screen,
- 93 -
all in some ways reminiscent of dream.
... formal questions become politically crucial, because
ways of seeing are not natural and given, but bear a close
relationship to ideology. .109
The 'impression of reality' thus created allows covert passage
to other (non-cinematic) ideologies: those of family, religion, 'law
and order' race etc. A good summary of the process is furnished by
Michel Marie:
"... L'effet de re'alitg (c'est a dire la production de
l'impression de realit g) a pour fonction ideologique de
refouler le travail producteur du film, de reproduire le
monde vague, informule, non theorise, impensg, de
l'idgologie dominante, et par cette meme operation d'imposer
des representations idgologiques qui se donnent pour 'natu-
relies'. Le cinema est donc caracteris g doublement comme
reproducteur d'ideologies pre-existentes, et comme produc-
teur d'une idgologie specifique, la fameuse 'impression de
realite', fondee surla transparence illusoire qui, en niant
l'ecran, redouble l'evidence du vraisemblable et donc con-
tribue a renforcer l'idgologie refletge."11
What are at stake here are the mechanisms by which comedy can
also be instrumental in reinforcing readings consistent with a
dominant ideology. The literature available on this subject is
generally untouched by any materialist conception of society, and
use of that literature has therefore involved reading it across a
materialist perspective. In what follows, formulations are avoided
which use too vague a vocabulary and which appear oblivious to class
analysis, 111 and quotes are used insofar as the insights are
compatible with a materialist analysis, or can be appropriated and
reworked. The work of Greig, Duncan, Eastman and Nicolson in
particular is either scornful or silent in relation to notions of
differential readings of comedy based on the social position of the
spectator. When Eastman quotes J.N. Ding's version of the "Shavian
metaphor",
"The cartoon ... is a sort of humour-coated capsule, by means
of which the sober judgements of editorial minds may surrep-
titiously be gotten down the throats of an apathetic public.
In other words ... the apple sauce in which political pills
are immersed and fed to unwilling children."112
he sees this in very simplistic, manipulatory terms, and denies that
it is applicable in any but the most blatant cases of political
propaganda.
The social function of comedy has been identified at least in
passing be many writers, among them Bergson, Klapp, Palmer, Boston.
Writing from a position well within the cultural establishment,
Allan Rodway has written
"Every culture is engaged in a perpetual defence of its
established va1ues." 113
and H. Dalziel Duncan thus:
"Wise authorities understand well the conservative function
of comedy. Saturnalia, Mediaeval Lords and Abbotts misrule,
real and symbolic killing of mock kings, indicate clearly
that comedy has long been used to uphold ... authority."114
"It seems clear that joking is a powerful conservative. Its
effects reinforce existing ideology, power, status, moral-
ity, norms and values within a society ... Through its
pleasures and personal utility, humour recruits and bribes
us to become laughing conservatives ... Freed from igno-
rance, inhibitions, fear and prejudice, the super-psyche
would have no use for humour. You will recognize a Utopia
by the complete absence of humour; you will spot superman by
his unmitigated, infuriating seriousness."115
Also relevant here are the notions of carnival discussed above, and
rule-breaking in the area of language, literary and cinematic
convention as discussed below (pg.118 ff.).
"We have a compulsion to be moral and decent, but we also
resent the obligation we have accepted. The irreverence of
the carnival disburdens us of our resentment and purges our
ambivalence so that we can return to our duties as honest
men ... comedy cures folly by folly. "116
- 95 -
There are (at least) four ways in which comedy can fulfil a
social-control function.
Corrective function
Laughter at aberrant behaviour or at some form of unsociability
can have a corrective function, but comparison between this century
and the last is apposite here. Whilst other forms of social control
through comedy are arguably as common as ever, the crudely correc-
tive function has largely lost its force except in smaller groups
-here we are concerned with a more general conception of society/
ideology. It is probably significant that the main author who uses
'corrective' terminology is Henri Bergson, with one foot firmly in
the 19th century. For Bergson,
"Laughter would fail in its object if it bore the stamp of
sympathy or kindness."17
Defusing/evading of conflict 
Eric Midwinter describes the soothing role of comedy:
"By grinning at man's condition, by softening the edges of
his aggressive efforts to have wrongs righted, by channel-
ling his energies into the mill-race of laughter, by keeping
his pecker up, comedians may have helped resist the correc-
tion of legitimate grievances ... it could be argued that
they help preserve the status quo, the unrocked boat and the
stability of the social fabric."118
He also makes this observation in relation to the 'safety-valve'
function:
"Comedians stay within the restraints of the State and its
generally accepted norms; they rail a little at its institu-
tions - its Government, matrimonial units, workspaces,
police, even its royalty, but it is an affectionate sniping,
and of menace to those institutions there is none. In fact,
- 96 -
it may be that they are strengthened by their show of sport-
ing good fellowship in graciously allowing themselves to be
used as butts."-19
The conflict-function served by much so-called 'satire' is thus
minimised, indeed turned to the particular Establishment's advan-
tage. An efficient form of satire, as we have seen, is that
described by Max Eastman:
"Good satire ... is not an attack at all. It denies the vic-
tim that honour ... it destroys him without attack, without
taking him seriously, as a plaything, a toy, a thing but for
the pure fun of destruction hardly worth destroying..120
Richard Boston, 121 following Freud, points out that humour relating
to particular topics (for example mother-in-law jokes, racialist
jokes) is observed and enjoyed in situations where there is a degree
of tension about that subject, so that the joke/humour can function
as a safety-valve.
"Topics which are capable of evoking a humorous reaction in
an individual seem frequently 'loaded' for that individual
with an unpleasant emotional effect."122
This kind of consideration is likely to be of limited interest in
our context, since the Monty Python films enjoy a relatively aetiol-
ated relation to everyday life and topical issues, though we shall
have cause to look at the role of anxiety about anality, sexuality,
violence etc. in appreciation of this kind of comedicity.
One device which helps to defuse any possible conflictual
situation or relation is trivialisation, often of entire issues.
For Gerald Mast,
"If the subject-matter is not intrinsically trivial, a comedy
reduces important subject-matter to the trivial.23
The spectator/audience can consequently forget the gravity of the
underlying issues. In a rather different context, Franz Schoen-
berger wrote that
"An acute sense of the comical ... sometimes works like a
narcotic, because one usually forgets that a situation can
be at the same time highly humorous and terribly danger-
.ous. 124
Schoenberger was referring to the gallows-humour of concentration-
camp victims, but surely the principle applies to any arguably
'serious' situation, for instance one in which the audience watches
the vomiting sequence in Meaning of Life and forgets the discrepan-
cies between eating habits in different parts of the world.
Such a defusing of potential conflict can be seen as an evasion:
"... the comedian can evade the conflict, relieving the
stress between competing ideals by laughter."125
The function of such an evasion of conflict (be it thought of at the
level of textual operations or of authorship) is predominantly
conservative, though it has to be noted that trivialisation has been
claimed also as a potentially oppositional/subversive tactic in the
comedy of minority/oppressed groups. Raymond Durgnat's comment in
1964 could have been applied to any number of comedies:
"... this neutrality often implies obscurantism and complais-
ance. The themes aroused are often such as to demand a
decision one way or the other; in those cases, to sit on the
fence is a failure to tackle the theme properly. Often it
is an answer." 126 (original emphasis)
Role of the 'comic fool'.
In 'The Fool as a Social Tyne' Orrin Klapp conveniently
summarises the role of the 'fool'.
"The fool is a social type having certain definable roles and
a special status and function in group life. Fools repre-
sent departures from group norms of propriety which are sub-
ject to the sanction of ridicule. Fool-making is a continu-
ous social process and operates to enforce propriety and to
adjust status. 127
This formulation, with its "sanction of ridicule" and "enforce" is
perhaps rather mechanistic and ahistorical, a throwback to the
'corrective' function mentioned above. More flexible is Laura
Makarius' version:
"One of the functions of these rule-breakers is as a safety-
valve in societies where the basic rules are over-rigid."I28
In any case it is clear that the social function of the fool or
clown involves some form of control or regulation. The scapegoat
aspect of the fool/clown has been discussed by Wylie Sypher; he
traces the role of the scapegoat back to biblical and pre-Socratic
phallic rituals, and relates the comic hero's role to that of the
"alazon", the "antagonist and profaner" who must be sacrificed to
make good the violence done to the god/king.
"The impostor profanes the rites; then he is beaten and
driven out."18
This "sacrifice" corresponds also to the sacrifice of the son in the
"reverse-Oedipus" thesis first developed by Ludwig Jeke1 13 and
taken up by Martin Grotjahn:
"The thesis is simple ... (in comedy) the tragic guilt of the
son is displaced upon the father ... it is the father who is
guilty. ,,131
These models are most attractive in dealing with films in which a
central figure functions as . fool or scapegoat. In view of the
frequently fragmented nature of the Monty Python films, examples are
likely to be more transitory and the notion of the Monty Python team
themselves (as performers, as authors) as "son" may be more produc-
tive, with establishment referents such as the Church, the Festival
of Light, and diegetic coherence in the role of the father, the Law.
In Grotjahn's scenario, the establishment (Law) would then educate/
- 99 -
manipulate the Son, who would refuse. The aggression of the Father
would then be quelled, and the Son sacrificed ...
A more readily apparent mechanism is that coinciding with the
'superiority thesis' developed by Plato and Aristotle, then by
Hobbes:
"The passion of laughter is nothing else but sudden glory
arising from a sudden conception of some eminency in our-
selves by comparison with the infirmity of others."132
The laughter of conscious superiority is less easy to identify in
our society (we no longer go to laugh at the lunatics for our
entertainment), but this is not to say that a sense of superiority
plays no part:
"Pleasure in the comic arises from a more or less conscious
comparison between the onlooker's perfection and the other
person's obvious imperfection. 1,133
The laughter of superiority clearly has an important part to play in
the Monty Python films, though less so in the stronger narratives
(Life of Brian, Monty Python and the Holy Grail) than in the
earlier And Now for Something Completely Different or in the TV
programmes.
"We use police and army a lot ... If you want to make a fool
of anyone it is obviously much better if he is a cabinet
minister, merchant banker, a clergyman, a policeman or an
army officer rather than a plumber or a plasterer's
mate." 134
Finally, the innocent fool or simpleton can also (and simulta-
neously) function as an identification-figure. The simpletons in
the Monty Python films seem to function more in this way than as
butts. St. John Chrysostom defined the fool as "he who gets
slapped", 135 and the vocabulary of physical chastisement is taken up
by Enid Welsford:
- 100 -
"The fool is now no longer a mere safety-valve for the sup-
pressed instincts of the bully; he provides a subtler balm
for the fears and wounds of those afflicted with the infe-
riority complex."136
Leaving aside the unidentified source of this "inferiority complex"
(social or individual for Welsford? - one suspects that for her it
is entirely a matter of individual psychology), Welsford pinpoints
our tendency to identify with "the buffeted simpleton". And she
does put her finger on the nature of the ideological 'work' per-
formed by such an identification-effect:
"How comforting then to be persuaded that the blows are
always harmless, that the victim is never hurt."137
When children play with toy machine-guns, they 'learn' that if you
shoot someone, he/she is not really dead. This kind of message is
particularly efficiently conveyed in films and television, media
with peculiarly effective means of achieving a 'reality-effect'
which then articulates a number of (predominantly dominant) ideolo-
gies, by mechanisms which will be discussed later.
Group reinforcement of established/conventional values.
Richard Stephenson furnishes a succinct reference to
"... control mechanisms expressing the common value systems
and minimising the notion of class conflict and conscious-
ness. 138
Gerald Mast, attempting to define some types of comic films, identi-
fies the non-confrontation of the mores of the status-quo as a
feature common to much comedy. In such films, value systems are
based on crude assumptions and hackneyed clichgs.139
The argument about whether or not laughter is fundamentally a
group phenomenon can be left to one side here; Bergson's view that
- 101 -
laughter needs an echo/support from "other intelligences" is clearly
quite different from Freud's emphasis on the individual's psychic
energy. What is relevant is that laughter can and does possess a
group dimension:
"It is the business of laughter to repress any separatist
tendency. Its function is to convert rigidity to plastic-
ity, to readapt the individual to the whole. i40
This may be called the integrationist function of laughter.
Some experimental work has been done on the comparative
responses to comic stimuli of individuals on their own and in group
situations. R.E. Per1 141 found that group 'viewings' of verbal
jokes produced higher 'funniness' ratings than individual perusal of
comparable jokes. Ferl identified three causes which may contribute
to this: the larger number of stimuli encouraging laughter (for
example the sight and sound of others laughing), the release of
common restrained impulses, and the feeling of moral sanction for
their release.
What this stems from is the fact that the reflexive/analytic
mode is harder to sustain in a group situation. The 'joke-effect'
or humorousness of a particular comedic element depends precisely on
the rules/codes structuring that element remaining implicit; if the
mechanism of the joke or comedic element is make explicit then it is
no longer 'funny'. The way in which these rules or codes operate
has been analysed at length by (among others) Arthur Koestler in a
rather abstract way, and Freud was also very aware of the effect of
the reflexive mode upon comedicity.
The integrationist mode of comedy depends on the consensus
sharing of values, notions of 'normality' as entertained within a
group. Any such consensus or sense of normality is itself con-
structed by the didactics of ideological representation, which
includes press and other media, social relations with peer - and
other groups, in fact all experience as lived through the imaginary
relation; 142 and this includes, of course, films, which are
generally experienced under conditions highly conducive to the
unconscious work of ideology. The consensi which may operate in a
particular audience are then likely to produce aggressive responses
to 'otherness', to intruders or outsiders; this aggression may well
explode as laughter.
This characteristic of the choral audience has been noted by a
number of writers. Thus Wylie Sypher:
"One of the strongest impulses comedy can discharge from the
depths of the social self is our hatred of the 'alien',
especially when the stranger who is 'different' stirs any
unconscious doubts about our own beliefs ... in this role
the comic artist is a conservative or even a reactionary who
protects our self-esteem ... to this extent the comic
response is tribal, and if it is malicious, uncivilized. Any
majority secretes venom against those who trouble it, then
works off this venom in mocking some figure."143
"... two elements in the public's humour: delight in suffer-
ing, contempt for the unfamiliar."144
Writing of Sully's view of the infectiousness of choral humour,
Harold Nicolson has observed that
"He implies that when individual laughter becomes choral it
tends to revert to primal laughter and he confesses that he
has found it difficult to recognize in an English music-hall
audience any distinct traces of a deposit from the advance
of the culture-stream."145
Once again, this corresponds to the conservative function of
laughter in preserving the status quo, resisting innovation.
Nicolson himself proposes:
"We shall find that English humour ... functions most
frequently as a defence mechanism ... against the incursion
of disturbing thoughts and feelings.146
Whilst I would not care to subscribe to Nicolson's very idealist/
ahistorical notion of "Englishness", he is correct in thus identify-
ing one of the key roles of comedy/humour, be it specifically
English (for complex reasons not on Nicolson's agenda) or of a more
general nature. The phenomenon had been remarked on some three and
a half centuries earlier, by Sir John Harington:
"... we shall observe that the joys we enjoy in this world
consist rather 'in indolentia' (as they call it) which is an
avoiding of grievances and inconveniences, than in possess-
ing any passing great pleasures."147
One way in which such 'excluding' group humour might, in a more
restricted context, be oppositional, is when it is directed against
absent authority-figures. In some research on psychiatric hospital
staff-meetings, for example, Coser 148 found significant levels of
humour directed at absent superiors. Again, however, the producti-
vity of such 'subversion' can be questioned:
"If the consensual dissent expressed in group laughter does
not lead to serious and concerted action ... the humour will
be ineffective, or even counterproductive, in influencing
the authority it jokingly attacks."148
Certainly the incidence of 'upward'-directed derisive group humour
to be found among schoolchildren (in relation to teachers), soldiers
(in relation to officers) or workers (in relation to management) can
be seen in these terms.
"Private ridicule would seem to act as a safety-valve - dif-
fusing and defusing those social tensions it expresses. The
humour would relieve recurrent frictions without reducing
their likelihood - conservatively preserving the system it
attacks. ,, 150
- 104 -
It is likely that in any one instance of comedy or humour the
conflict and control functions coexist.
"Comedy is both hatred and revel, rebellion and defence,
attack and escape. w151
"A joke is thus a double-dealing rascal who serves two mas-
ters at once. p152
More importantly, however, it would appear that the control function
more often than not predominates, and frequently when some aspect of
the Establishment or the system seems to be under attack. Enid
Welsford describes very well the popularity of 'social outcast'
'comic figures':
"(These characters) spend their time offending against the
social code, behaving as useless ... members of society. But
the loud applause which greets their delinquencies is no
sign that their devotees have a grudge against the social
order."153
It would obviously be far too simplistic to see the Monty Python
films either as revolutionary surrealism or as devious reactionary
opium.
"... judgements as to the 'progressiveness' of this or that
comedy, or, indeed, of this or that joke or gag, abstracted
from the narrative process and its institutional context,
need to be made with care. l54
Even the relatively crude question of 'gratuitous offence' (deliber-
ate references to Jewishness/Arabs, use of genital expletives)
cannot be reduced to glib formulae. Again a precise knowledge of
the reception context is essential. What will concern us at a later
stage will be how particular (grotesque and scatological) comedic
elements work in determinate contexts, and whether their functions
are to be associated predominantly with social control or with
promotion of conflict or criticism.
(ii) Psychogenesis and psychological functions.
We shall here concentrate primarily on the sections of Freud's
work which deal with psychic economy. A discussion of his suggested
structures (three-person, two-person) for jokes and for the 'comic'
will be left until the later subsection concerned specifically with
obscene/excremental humour.
"We derive pleasure from both binding and releasing, dominat-
ing and being dominated, expending and economising, knowing
and not knowing, equivalencing and differencing, articulat-
ing and identifying, ... according to a certain economv."156
(original emphasis)
What are striking in a (retroactive) reading of this are the reso-
nances set up with, for example, Bourdieu's vocabulary of the
economy of language and culture.
The next step for Freud was to categorise jokes (heuristically
as later became evident) as either 'innocent' or 'tendentious'. The
tendentious jokes in turn could then be said either to give satis-
faction by cleverly evading some external (often social or politi-
cal) obstacle, or by evading an internal impulse which opposes the
joke's tendentious purpose. For Freud the former type is relatively
trivial:
"It may nevertheless strike us that, however much these and
analogous jokes of a tendentious nature may satisfy us, they
are not able to provoke much laughter. 157
and he asserts the likelihood that
"... the removal of an internal obstacle may make an incompa-
rably higher contribution to the pleasure."158
It seems that Freud's next conclusion, unremarkable though it may
seem now, was due to a crudely empirical, even intuitive observation
regarding the 'funniness' of these two 'types' of joke.
- 106 -
"... since we know that in both cases of the use of tenden-
tious jokes pleasure is obtained, it is therefore plausible
to suppose that this yield of pleasure corresponds to the
psychical expenditure that is saved."159
We are now accustomed to the importance of unconscious processes
such as repression; but Freud's own development of these concepts is
here a curious mixture of rigour and unwarranted assumption.
Having 'established' this relation between pleasure and psychic
economy, Freud returns to 'innocent' jokes to try to elucidate the
ways in which laughter might represent a release of economised
energy. He first identifies the pleasure of word-plays and puns
(examples of the joke-technique of multiple use of the same mate-
rial) 160 as based on acoustic similarities, a pleasure which
originates in the child-like habit of "treating words like things".
The most straightforward examples of such jokes are 'bad' jokes,
jokes relying for their effect on 'gratuitous' connections which are
not worked into the 'text' of the joke. However, Freud recognizes
"This rediscovery of what is familiar is pleasurable, and
once more it is not difficult for us to recognize this plea-
sure as a pleasure in economy and to relate it to economy in
psychical expenditure."161
As we have noted above, this is a particularly common source of
pleasure, but Freud points out one interesting area of recognition,
that of topicality. Clearly jokes rely heavily on context and
topical references for their success: jokes about politicians and
other media personalities tend (especially in this age of post-
mechanical reproduction) to have very short active lives.
"The need which men feel for deriving pleasure from their
processes of thought is therefore constantly creating new
jokes based on the new interests of the day."162
These observations are astute enough but they incidentally prefigure
- 107 -
the problems of sustaining the distinction on which Freud insists
between jokes and 'the comic'. The pleasure of repetition/
recognition is complexly common to both.
The third form of pleasure in these jokes is what Freud calls
"pleasure in nonsense". For the time being he does not go into the
details of the childhood origins of this pleasure, but for him
nonsense was no part of 'serious life'. The 'nonsense' component in
jokes is an attempt at escape from the strictures of rationality, of
logic, of criticism of absent-minded childishness, and to return to
a presymbolic order where 'logical' criteria do not apply. This
formulation of this impulse can profitably be compared with the
Sypher quote on page 95 above.
"... the rebellion against the compulsion of logic and
reality is deep-going and long-lasting. Even the phenomena
of imaginative activity must be included in this (rebelli-
ous) category. .163
There is a stimulating parallel to be drawn here with the 'inversion
of law' of carnivalesque happenings. We must remember, however,
that any such comparison must take account of the specific conjunc-
ture. 'Law' and 'logic', like Oedipus and the modalities of repres-
sion, are not absolute categories but are socially and ideologically
constructed at particular historical moments. We may wonder for
example, whether the absurdity of Monty Python can be described as
'carnivalesque', and what significance this may have in a contempo-
rary context.
An important aspect of the comedic, which Freud discusses
because of its similarity to joke-techniques but which is likely to
be of more value to us because of the frequently surreal/absurd
- 108 -
aspects of Monty Python films, is its close similarity to the
dream-work. 164 In a manner analogous to that used in dreams,
material which is threatening or sensitive and hence liable to
repression is broken down into suitable components, the relevant
psychic 'load' displaced onto new elements appropriate for a joke,
and the new elements recombined/condensed into a joke-form which
allows the psychic energy (anxiety, fear, anger) associated with the
original material to be mobilized. Since the energy cannot be
articulated directly, it 'explodes' as a comic response, as laugh-
ter. Thus we can see the sense of Freud's prioritisation of 'inter-
nal' obstacles. He formulates the above procedure in this way:
"Let us decide ... to adopt the hypothesis that this is the
way in which jokes are formed in the first person; a precon-
scious thought is given over for a moment to unconscious
revision and the outcome of this is at once grasped by con-
scious perception. l65
Like the dream-work, the formation and recollection of jokes are
thus involuntary and subject to the vagaries of 'association':
"Often they are not at the disposal of our memory when we
want them; but at other times, to make up for this, they
appear involuntarily, as it were 166
These structural similarities are convincing and instructive. They
are strengthened by another similarity, pointed out by Freud, in
relation to the pleasure-seeking preference accorded to recognition
and to the above-mentioned topicality:
"In the formation of dreams, too, we come across a special
preference for what is recent and we cannot escape a suspi-
cion that association with what is recent is rewarded, and
so facilitated, by a peculiar bonus of pleasure."167
These similarities and parallels are instructive. Yet the differ-
ences are equally instructive. A dream is a relatively asocial
mental product which needs to remain uncomprehended if it is to
fulfil its purpose. A joke, on the other hand, is
- 109 -
"... the most social of all social functions that aim at a
yield of pleasure ... a condition of intelligibility is,
therefore, binding on it."168
Though one may question how Freud can assert "most social", it is
true that a joke needs to be comprehensible in order to be effective
whilst a dream's effectivity is dependent on its inscrutability (and
its forgetability). This is why
"All ... methods of displacement appear too as techniques of
joking. But when they appear, they usually respect the lim-
its imposed on their enjoyment in conscious thinking. "169
By contrast, the dream-work has other requirements:
"Under the pressure of the censorship, any sort of connection
is good enough to serve as a substitute by allusion, and
displacement is allowed from any element to any other."'"
This brings us back to the absurd and to the more intellectual
"surreal". One reason why nonsense/absurdity causes problems for
Freud is probably that not only can the absurdity be (as he cor-
rectly notes) an unconscious desire to return to pre-rational
pleasures; absurdity can also be deliberately cultivated, 'con-
sciously' created. The technique of the dream-work (more or less
arbitrary substitutes for displacement) is employed for comedic
purposes, for 'surreal' humour. This kind of comedicity, the world
of "I've got a ferret sticking up my nose", of flying sheep, of
violent diegetic fragmentation, of potential disorientation, is the
stuff of Monty Python. The deformation and play with dream- and
joke-structures can take on the appearance of deconstruction, of the
creation of 'alienation' in the spectator. This will concern us
again when we look at our film(s) in more detail, and also when we
consider how the class/cultural-capital positioning of an audience
disposes it towards such comedic modes.
In a section entitled 'The Psychogenesis of Jokes', Freud
identifies three possible stages in the production of a joke. The
stage of 'play' corresponds to the child-like pleasure in repeti-
tion, in recognition of the familiar; the 'jest' represents a
preliminary stage of the joke in which the 'techniques' of jokes are
mobilized but there is not yet a 'serious purpose', the pleasure is
not yet anchored to a particular repressed anxiety; finally the joke
proper is invested with 'value' the function of which is to mobilize
the psychic energy associated vith the repressed material.
"If what a jest says possesses substance and value, it turns
into a joke."171
At this point in Freud's disquisition it becomes clear that if he
wishes to retain his overall model of joke-technique and its rela-
tion to the unconscious, the earlier distinction between 'innocent'
and 'tendentious' jokes becomes untenable. Freud himself recognizes
this:
"Even though we have earlier asserted that such jokes are to
be described as innocent and not yet tendentious, we must
not forget that strictly-speaking only jests are non-
tendentious - that is, serve solely the aim of producing
pleasure. Jokes, even if the thought contained in them is
non-tendentious and thus only serves theoretical intellec-
tual interests, are in fact never non-tendentious."172
This is a view around which writers on comedy have tended to pola-
rize, either implicitly or with explicit statements of agreement or
rejection. Psychoanalyst Martin Grotjahn is inclined to agree:
"The sophisticated reader will note aggressive trends in
every witticism."173
Humorous writer Max Eastman is more inclined to scoff. Though at
some points (as we shall see) his insights do coincide with Freud's,
Eastman's pronouncements on this issue make surprising reading.
Couched in a barely disguised hostility to the idea of an uncon-
scious, to psychoanalysis, and apparently to any 'serious' approach
to the comedic, are a reference to Walt Disney ("he seemed an
appropriate commentator") to lend support to his opposition to
Freud, and the following line:
"Sex-jokes are easy to make, and no special theory is needed
to explain them."174
To return to Freud. At this point he is able to specify more
clearly the function of so-called tendentious jokes.
"We are now able to state the formula for the mode of oper-
ation of tendentious jokes. They put themselves at the ser-
vice of purposes in order that, by means of using the plea-
sure from jokes as a fore-pleasure, they may produce new
pleasure by lifting suppressions and repressions."Th
The notion of 'fore-pleasure' is an important one which is very
elegantly used in a slightly different context by Terry Eagleton. In
conducting a (rather playful) microanalysis of one line of poetry,
he writes
"Whether (this line) can cajole me into laying down my
ideology, so to speak, is ... a matter of whether it can
corner for its own ends some of the unconscious energy I
invest in my 'beliefs', while reassuring me that I have no
need to feel guilty or anxious about this ... or that it is
worth trading that quantity of guilt or anxiety for the
libidinal gratification it will afford me. 176
The gratification offered by the line would be
"... a kind or 'fore-pleasure' which tries to seduce me into
admiring its fantasies ..."177
The reader of (theoretically any) text might thus be 'seduced' by in
this case semiotic/libidinal gratifications, irrespective of the
manifest content of the text - hence the possibility of 'liking'
texts which one may disapprove of or disagree with. This is very
close to the ways in which Freud formulates the forepleasure func-
tion of the joke-technique:
"(The joke) will further bribe the hearer with its yield of
pleasure into taking sides with us without any very close
investigation ... This is brought out with perfect aptitude
- 112 -
in the common phrase 'die IAcher auf siene Seite ziehen' (to
bring laughers over to your side)."178
"We are inclined to give the thought the benefit of what has
pleased us in the form of the joke, and we are no longer
inclined to find anything wrong that has given us enjoyment
and so to spoil the source of a pleasure." 179 (original
emphasis)
If anything, he seems to overestimate the power of jokes to seduce
the receiver into 'accepting' an alien message.
"... it shatters respect for institutions and truths in which
the hearer has believed ..."18O
Apart from the phenomenon which we noted in Eric Midwinter's quote
above (pg.96) regarding the resilience of establishment institutions
regarding criticism, it is surely simply misguided to assert that
jokes can radically change opinions. Rather are they likely to
function as reinforcement for already-held opinions, or as a gradual 
wearing down and modification. The issue is always complicated by
the intrusion upon the joke-scene of the 'intellectual play' factor
also discussed above. The pleasure of recognizing a 'clever',
unusual or ingenious joke-form carries a kick of superiority, of
satisfaction, which can be hard to admit to if the manifest content
of the joke is obnoxious/unacceptable. Though the move from jokes
to a wider comedic ambit is not itself without problems, this
promises to be an interesting question in relation to much Monty
Python material, in which blatantly 'sexist' images, flirting with
racism, and what many critics have called 'bad taste' are all
complicated by the (possible) enjoyment of 'clever' comedy.
In discussing the origins of 'the comic' as opposed to jokes,
Freud develops the notion of a preconscious 'comparison' mechanism:
"It will only become easy for us ... to throw light on the
contradiction to the definition of the comic if we suppose
that the origin of comic pleasure lies in a comparison of
- 113 -
the difference between two expenditures. Comic pleasure and
the effect by which it is known - laughter - can only come
about if this difference is utilizable and capable of dis-
charge. .181
The origins of this urge to compare are again to be found in child-
hood. Freud recognizes the impulse to superiority, to mockery,
which he asserts is present in children in a 'pure' state, and is
then modified, diluted, inhibited during the education process, so
that in adults the impulse is effectively repressed.
"The use of moderation and restraint, even in the case of
permitted impulses, is a late fruit of education and is
acquired by the mutual inhibition of mental activities
brought together in a combination. Where such combinations
are weakened, as in the unconscious of dreams or in the
mono-ideism of psychoneuroses, the child's lack of moder-
ation re-emerges. 182
While the disguised 'comic' laughter is a liberation of aggressive
or mocking impulses mediated by a preconscious comparison with a
childhood state, children themselves, for Freud, do not 'need' the
comic (or, for that matter, jokes or humour):
"We may infer that the comic feeling is not present in a
child's superior laughter. It is a laughter of pure plea-
.sure. 183
"If one might generalize, it would seem most attractive to
place the specific characteristic of the comic which we are
in search of in an awakening of the infantile - to regard
the comic as the regained 'lost laughter of childhood' ..184
While this in itself seems a reasonable comment, the precise mecha-
nism by which the comparison with childhood is made is somewhat
vague and unsatisfying, considering the comparative rigour of the
preceding work on jokes. Freud is driven to use a model which
indicates a considerable gap in his own grasp of the idea of the
unconscious: for him comic feeling is necessarily derived
"... from a difference in expenditure that arises in the
course of understanding another person. l85
At another point he admits the tentative nature of his findings:
- 114 -
"I am unable to decide whether degradation to being a child
is only a special case of comic degradation, or whether
everything comic is based fundamentally on degradation to
being a child."188
As another semi-digression we can note Max Eastman's response to
this kind of approach and to the analytic mode in general:
"I suspect them (such theorists) not only of never having
seen a baby, but of never having been one."187
His response to Piddington's thesis that "every ludicrous situation
involves two conflicting evaluations in the social order" (an
'incongruity' theory) is that "Mr. Piddington most assuredly never
saw a baby." 188 It is worth reproducing a paraphrase of Eastman's
four "laws" concerning humour.
a) Things can be funny only when we are 'in fun', at least
partly.
b) When we are 'in fun' a shift of values takes place so
that some otherwise unpleasant things are potentially
funny.
c) Being 'in fun' is natural in childhood.
d) 'in fun' potential is retained to varying degrees by
adults.18
As a phenomenological description of how humour can be observed this
will pass, but Eastman eschews any detailed theory. He is content
to assert that
"A more concise, clear-cut, explicit, universally perceived
and heeded state of being than that called 'only fooling' or
'in fun' does not exist..190
We are brought back, once more, to Freud, whose project is
precisely to define what this 'in fun' means. His answer is by no
means comprehensive, but opens up some useful avenues. Very
briefly, his discussion of the factors influencing the 'comic mood'
includes191
(i) a generally cheerful mood, including toxic states; the
role of jokes and the comic in trying to sustain/attain a
cheerful mood.
(ii) Expectation of the comic, increased susceptibility to
relatively low levels of stimulation. Importance of rec-
ognition and repetition.
(iii) imaginative or intellectual work with serious aims inter-
feres with comic pleasure, so that larger stimulus is
then necessary to reappropriate cathexes for comedic use.
(iv) self-reflexivity with respect to the comedic process
(analysis of comedy) blocks release of psychic energy by
this path.
(v) comic response is blocked by the existence of strong emo-
tion in respect to the situation or content; 192 the comic
emerges most easily when feelings are not strongly
involved.
(vi) comic pleasure is helped by other pleasurable accompany-
ing circumstances which act as fore-pleasure in the same
way as for tendentious jokes.
It may be interesting (though no doubt difficult) to take such
considerations into account when planning and carrying out audience
studies in relation to Monty Python.
We seem to be unable to shake off the notion of pleasure; in one
form or another it keeps returning, perhaps the ghost of the cotton-
reel. If we bracket off the reservation we expressed above about
Freud's oversimplification of childhood, it certainly does appear
that some form of return to pre-comedic pleasure is at the heart of
comedy. For Freud,
"... the euphoria which we endeavour to reach by these means
is nothing other than the mood of a period of life in which
we were accustomed to deal with our psychical work in gen-
eral with a small expenditure of energy - the mood of our
childhood, when we were ignorant of the comic, when we were
incapable of jokes, and when we had no need of humour to
make us feel happy in our life.n193
- 116 -
Before we go on to consider more specifically the links between
social/ideological and psychoanalytic aspects of the comedic, let us
look more closely at the role of the comedic in the movement from
infancy194 to adulthood. We shall be considering some examples of
erotic/obscene humour and jokes, but a discussion of obscene-
tendentious joke-structures will be left until the next subsection.
In the Lacanian order of things the entry of the infant into
symbolisation is effected at the cost of subjection to Law (of the
Father); the details of the trajectory involving the mirror-phase,
the Oedipus complex and symbolic castration need not concern us
here; suffice it to reaffirm the culture-specific nature of these
processes 199 and their ultimate link with the economic nexus. We
may then entertain the tentative thesis that a radical deconstruc-
tion of signification within the symbolic order might open up a
space for a wedge to be driven in. Nor surprisingly, the possibil-
ity of the comedic fulfilling such a subversive function has occu-
pied a number of minds. Thus Steve Neale:
"If the disordering and reordering process is such as to rei-
terate or renew socially established discourses, meanings,
modes and structures of signification, then the laughter of
the third person can be seen as resulting from the re-
stabilisation of the subject. If, on the contrary, it is
such as to disturb the symbolic order of the Law, then the
mode of laughter is different, stemming not from the re-
inscription of the Law and the re-stabilisation of the sub-
ject but instead from a rearrangement of the symbolic such
as to shatter the stability of both."96
To stress that work on the level of comedic signification is essen-
tial,
"For the Law is not simply a matter of the ideological con-
tent of discourse, but of the orders of the articulation of
meaning, and narration of jokes and gags would have to take
different forms, which themselves oppose the orders of dis-
course and language characteristic of the Law, if these
- 117 -
jokes and gags are to achieve a re-orderin2 of the symbolic
that is in any way radically effective."191
In endorsing the erosion of the supports of "logocentrism,
idealism, theologism, the scaffolding of political and subjective
economy", Rosemary Jackson articulates a manifesto which can stand
for radical political work in any cultural area:
"Far from construing this attempt at erosion as a mere
embrace of barbarism or of chaos, it is possible to discern
it as a desire for something excluded from cultural order
- more specifically, for all that is in opposition to the
capitalist and patriarchal order which has been dominant in
Western society over the last two centuries. As a litera-
ture of desire, the fantastic can be seen as providing a
point of departure, in Bersani's words, for an authentically
civilizing scepticism about the nature of our desires and
.the nature of our being. 198
The language of desire also has a subversive function for
Deleuze and Guattari:
"... men who know how to leave, to scramble the codes, to
cause flows to circulate, to traverse the desert of the body
without organs. They overcome a limit, they shatter a wall,
the capitalist barrier. But through the impasses and
triangles a schizophrenic flow moves, irresistibly; sperm,
river, drainage, inflamed genital mucus, or a stream of
words that do not let themselves be coded, a libido that is
too fluid, too viscous; a violence against syntax, a con-
certed destruction of the signifier, non-sense erected as a
flow, polyvocity that returns to haunt all relations ...
Engels demonstrated ... how an author is great because he
cannot prevent himself from tracing flows and causing them
to circulate, flows that split asunder the catholic and
despotic signifier of his work, and that necessarily nourish
a revolutionary machine on the horizon. That is what style
is, or rather the absence of style, - asyntactic, agrammati-
cal; the moment when language is no longer defined by what
it says, even less by what makes it a signifying thing, but
by what causes it to move, and to explode - desire. .199
It has to be noted, however, that for Deleuze and Guattari this
eruption of desire is more fundamental than the ('mere') transgres-
sion of Law as outlined by Neale above; the Law is itself a front, a
displaced despot:
- 118 -
"... the law proves nothing about an original reality of
desire because it essentially disfigures the desired; and
the transgression proves nothing about a functional reality
of the law because, far from being a mockery of the law, it
is itself derisory in relation to what the law prohibits in
reality. .200
Nevertheless, all artistic activity has the potential for the kind
of radical decoding through which desire can escape.
"Because art, as soon as it attains its own grandeur, its own
genius, creates chains of decoding and deterritorialisation
that serve as the foundation for desiring-machines, and make
them function."201
The German poet Morgenstern is thus compared with Carroll and
Lear by Philip Thomson:
"... on record as claiming that man's basically unsatisfac-
tory relationship to his fellows, his society and world in
general stems from his being imprisoned by language, which
is a most unreliable, false and dangerous thing, and that
one must 'smash language', destroy man's naive trust in this
most familiar and unquestioned part of his life, before he
can learn to think properly. .202
Making language 'strange', forcing the reader to reinterpret outside
the habitual sets of linguistic assumptions, can thus persuasively
be seen as inherently progressive. Whether the 'inherent' potential
of such a practice can be realized in particular instances is,
however, another matter. The deconstructionist project is not in
itself any guarantee of radical political effectivity:
"That the breaking of the imaginary relation between text and
viewer is the first prerequisite of political questions in
art has, I would hold, been evident since Brecht. That the
breaking of the imaginary relationship can constitute a
political goal in itself is the ultra-leftist fantasy of the
surrealists and of much of the avante-garde work now being
undertaken in the cinema. 203
The inadequacy/ineffectivity of presymbolic 'revolt' is also
thus suggested in a portmodernist context:
"... it's our thesis ... that the tension between somatic and
thetic experience (between nonsense play and symbolisation)
has already been absorbed by promotional culture in the form
of the 'recyclage' of all forms of sign-struggles ..."2"
The audience study which will form a later part of this work will be
an attempt to assess (among other things) the ways in which absurd/
nonsense elements in Monty Python are read by particular viewers.
For the moment we can consider another aspect of the Pythons'
'rule-breaking'.
The Monty Python team were certainly not "the first" to abandon
punch-lines, to abandon sketches and overall programme formats, to
(at least occasionally if not systematically) use nonsense and
surrealism for comedic effect on television. The single programme
which did on all these fronts seem to predate Monty Python, (and
which, incidentally, merits one small paragraph in Wilmut's book
-there must be a reason why), featured ex-goon Spike Milligan. Q.
was broadcast in 1969 while discussions about the Monty Python
project were in progress, and was followed in later years by 25,
sa, gs, and Q.
"Jones: 'I remember looking at those shows and thinking,
"Shiti he's done it" He just totally ripped up all form
and shape - and there we'd been writing three-minute
sketches with beginnings, middles and ends - and Milligan
started a sketch, and then it turned into a different
sketch, then it turned into something else'. Certainly Mil-
ligan had beaten the Python team to the abandonment of the
punch-line, although his shows have an improvised feel to
them and he frequently terminates a sketch he has had enough
of by walking off the set muttering 'Did I write this?'"213
The 'Q' series would merit more extended consideration itself, but
one interesting question is why it did not achieve the success
claimed by Monty Python's Flying Circus. One reason may be that s;
was transmitted on BBC2, a 'minority' channel, which would
admittedly have had its 'cult' audience for Q. This audience may
- 120 -
well have grown more over subsequent years were it not for the
second reason, the very presence (on BBC1) of 11}mIty_j_ltateLn.miaq
Circus, not programmed at the same time but nevertheless functioning
as more charismatic cult-object. This in turn suggests a third kind
of reason, Milligan's own anti-charismatic and problematic image,
his more profound dissatisfaction with the world. For him, comedy
was an (even) more serious business than for the Monty Python team,
with the result that his surreal/nonsense humour could often cross
the boundary between pleasure and pain, frequently testing how much
repetition, say, or how gratuitous a sexual image is possible before
a comedic effect is lost. This is radical questioning indeed, and
the risks may consequently be greater:
"... the clown, the comedian, handle something not quite
proper - something embarrassing, astonishing and shocking;
although the clown holds the licentious thing in his hand
... he knows, and his audience knows, and both he and his
audience know that the other knows, that he is not the thing
... He is playing with fire; but he is not the fire, (and)
in the moment he identifies himself with the fire he is no
longer funny ... That fine delightful sense of balance and
mastery is lost, and the clown becomes pathetic, ineffec-
tive, disgusting. .206
Graham Chapman recounts how he used this kind of nonsense humour
when he returned to Cambridge to speak at the University Union
dressed as a carrot;
"And when it was my turn to make a speech, I said nothing.
Just stood there. Stood there and said nothing. And that
was my comment on the whole bloody business of people stand-
ing up and debating; trying to be clever, and eventually
becoming politicians - fucking mess, they're a load of
bloody idiots, and none of them have any social conscience.
I had to go on standing there beyond the point where it
became embarrassing, in order for it to become embarrassing
again. So I carried on standing there for a whole ten min-
utes, saying nothing. They laughed initially, because of the
costume. They were all expecting some enormously witty
remark to come out, apparently, to explain all this. But it
didn't ... I lay down and rolled across the floor to Ivor
Cutler ... and hissed 'get me out of this, Ivor'. So he
- 123. -
stood up and read a poem, which nobody understood (I
didn't). They were all totally bemused by what was going on.
Then at last, I was able to go and sit down, in my carrot
costume. 2O7
It is significant that the Monty Python programmes (and films), for
all their innovation and occasional 'offensiveness' rarely if ever
flirt with this area of embarrassment. This may well have been a
result of the 'team writing' method. By June 1988 the impulse to
such exposure does not seem to have deserted Graham Chapman. In a
brief appearance before a live audience of some 80,000 (and many
millions of television viewers) at the Nelson Mandela birthday
concert at Wembley Stadium, his sole contribution was to invite
maximum abuse from his audience
This is all very reminiscent of the risks involved in studying shit/
dirt (cf. pg.5 above), of being an embarrassment to the social
order. Charles clearly evokes the taboo, the excremental as the
comedian's subject-matter. Insofar as the 'rules' of narrative, of
jokes, of punch-lines, of TV comedy, (of a kind of language) in
general are the subject of Spike Milligan's humour, this is a
challenge to the spectator's subject-position in symbolisation and
can be rejected as dirty, as "inconvenant". The perceived threat of
a return of pre-symbolic modes of perception is as frightening as
the return of repressed anxieties about the excremental or the
genital.
While Milligan completely abandoned punchlines, the Monty Python
method was at first to replace them with intrusive characters such
as the colonel ("I'm stopping this sketch because it's silly"), or
the knight, which really substituted one form of 'punctuation' for
another. Wilmut claims that
"the team found that characters such as the knight and the
colonel became popular in themselves, rather like a visual
equivalent of the catch-phrase, which they despised as a
cheap way of raising a laugh; these characters were later
phased out..208
but the technique did persist and was very much in evidence, for
example, in the film And Now For Something Completely Different,
where in addition to Graham Chapman's colonel there are linking
devices such as Michael Palin's wandering joke-writer which permit
the movement from one 'sketch' to another without the use of a
punchline. The Monty Python programmes also tended to end sketches
with what Wilmut calls a "rave-up" ending, which gives the impres-
sion that this device may have been used when the team couldn't
think of another way out of the sketch. Certainly the 'rave-up'/
'escalation into disorder' now seems a standard ending in TV comedy
as diverse as The Benny Hill Show and (admittedly less formulaic-
ally) The Young Ones. Spike Milligan would surely not approve.
In his discussion of Rabelais, Mikhail Bakhtin identifies the
"nonsense form know as 'coq4-11Le1";
"This is a genre of intentionally absurd verbal combinations,
a form of completely liberated speech that ignores all
norms, even those of elementary logic."209
"The images chosen ... are devoid of all visible links. 210
This jumbling of images, which in Rabelaisian literature corresponds
to the "generating, devouring defecating body fused with nature and
with cosmic phenomena, is identified by Bakhtin as a popular-
festive form, as carnivalesque (cf. pp.11-12 above).
"... it was a form which granted momentary liberation from
all logical links - a form of free recreation. It was, so
to speak, the carnivalisation of speech, which freed it from
- 123 -
the gloomy seriousness of official philosophy as well as
from truisms and commonplace ideas..211
As Jackson notes,
"... what Bakhtin terms carnivalistic and official selves can
be made equivalent to Lacan's distinction between different
stages of development, the imaginary and the symbolic."212
Again it is very tempting to apply this description to some of the
Monty Python material, where the progression is not quite 'coq-
a-l'ane' but makes frequent use of non-sequiturs and apparently
random associations.
If any doubt remains as to the problem in this area,
"... it is a matter of apprehending the symbolic as repres-
sive and crippling to the subject, and of attempting to
transform the relations between the symbolic and the imagi-
nary. 213
Gershon Legman214 discusses the ways in which children can manipu-
late the structures of questions and answers and of jokes to subvert
authority and to mock representatives of the Law (parents, teach-
ers).
One weapon frequently thus used is "fausse candeur", feigned
innocence. Freud is not unaware of this.
"... the possibility of misleading naivety. We may assume in
the child an ignorance that no longer exists; and children
often present themselves as naive, so as to enjoy a liberty
that they would otherwise not be granted."215
Presumably for Freud the pleasantries that such situations produce
("Why doesn't daddy put his ship in mummy's harbour?") still repre-
sent innocent 'play' on the child's part, and would not be classed
as comic. Surely, though, Freud would accept that at the same time
the child's intervention has a serious function. Many instances of
such 'humour ,216 are directed towards real embarrassment of an adult
figure:
"Tout le eel de (cette) plaisanterie vient de ce que cette
situation n'a rien de dr8le ... vengeance calculee."217
Even if we see the calculation as a 'preconscious' one,
"... sauf exception, toute plaisanterie exige une victime
Arme de sa fausse candeur et pretendant lee prendre au pied
de la lettre, l'enfant retourne see mensonges contre leurs
auteurs."218
- an echo of Freud's recognition of the tendentious nature of all
jokes, and a prefiguring of the joke-structure which me shall look
at below.
Legman also identifies an important determinant of the form
which this infantile revolt takes as the deep-rooted assumptions
about 'truth' which pervade the pedagogic methods of Western educa-
tion: rare are the schools/institutions in which questioning and
free thought are encouraged; rather are children (still) led con-
stantly to search for "the right answer", the " best" way of doing
something. For Legman, the revolt through erotic/obscene jokes
stems from this. Ribald responses
"... sont dictees, non seulement par le 'Fa', mais par une
revolte contre une situation repressive. p219
Here the discourses of the (dominant) parent or teacher-figure can
be manipulated by the child to expose in turn the manipulation
implicit in the dominant discourse. Scatological and erotic remarks
are at first relatively permissible for the child:
"... il se concentre d'abord sur les interets scatologiques
qu'il sait lui etre, tant donne son age, relativement per-
mis. Ii se livre ainsi un certain nombre d'insultes sadi-
co-anales aux parents, insultes qui deviendront plus
serieuses lorsqu'elles entreront dans une sphere plus
directement sexuelle."220
Two examples may clarify this.
- 125 -
(i) "Maman, qu'est-ce qu'ils font?" demande une petite fille en
montrant le taureau qui eat grimpe sur la vache.
"Eh bien, tu comprends, le pauvre taureau eat fatigue et la
gentille vache l'aide a rentrer a l'etable".
"Toujours la eeme chose On commence par aider quelqu'un et
pour finir on se fait baiser."
(ii) Une petite fille de huit ans demande sa mere:
"Comment il eat venu- mon petit frare?"
"C'est le Pare Noel qui l'a apporte."
"Et le bbe de la voisine, c'est aussi le Pare Noal?"
"Oui, ma cherie."
"Mais, bordel, ii y a donc personne qui baise dans ce pate-
lin"221
This destruction of a falsely chaste or polite discourse is homolo-
gous with Freud's "degradation to being a child" and with Bergson's
idea that comedy arises from making the physical more obvious, from
exposing "the soul's embarrassment with its body". These kinds of
mechanisms of degradation are very common in Monty Python, and some
explicit examples of these 'clever' childish responses crop up in
The Meaning of Life; during the 'Every Sperm Is Sacred' sketch, two
remarks by individual children appear: "Couldn't mummy have worn
some kind of pessary?" and "Couldn't you have your balls cut off?"
Indeed such responses were (more innocently) prefigured in a sketch
from a 1967 transmission of I'm Sorry I'll Read That Again, in which
John Cleese was involved:
Cyril	 : Let's give her test three.
All 3 children : moo, moo, moo
Cyril's mum	 : Well, what's the game, children - can you see a
moo-cow, den?
Cyril	 : She's BO Stupid
The roots of this obscene rebellion may themselves lie in some
notion of ignorance, according to Legman. He notes a tendency
(which is not confined to children) to find obscene anything which
is not understood. (This is certainly supported by the way in which
words such as 'testimonials', 'piste' etc. so predictably bring
- 126 -
waves of laughter from a TV (comedy) studio audience) He quotes a
1st century Roman saying, "Omne ignotum pro obsceno" then comments
"Galgacus sous-estimait les talents des ecoliers a venir. Car
ii n'y a rien qui ne soit potentiellement obscene."222
Further, this 'ignorance', this not understanding is intimately
linked with a subservient position in relation to authority, to the
Law. In order to stand a chance of acceding to a position of
possessing or inhabiting the Law (the possible modalities by which
male and female sexed subjects can relate to the Law in Lacanian
terms are labyrinthine), the child must in our culture negotiate
such hazards as the Oedipus complex and castration anxiety. The
child's use of obscenity as a form of revolt can then be seen as an
at least nascent subversion of the dominant symbolic order. Freud
is also aware of this as a possible function of properly aggressive/
tendentious jokes in adult life:
"The prevention of invective or of insulting rejoinders by
external circumstances is such a common case that tenden-
tious jokes are especially favoured in order to make aggres-
siveness or criticism possible against persons in exalted
positions who claim to exercise authority. The joke then
represents a rebellion against that authority, a liberation
from its pressure. The charm of caricature lies in this
same factor: we laugh at them even if they are unsuccessful
simply because we count rebellion against authority as a
merit."223
There thus appear to be two conflicting functions being ful-
filled by childishly obscene humour. A childlike revolt/subversion
of the Law using embarrassing humour has to be seen in relation to
the notion of jokes and the comedic (sexual or otherwise) as
managing mechanisms, as a means of dealing with tension and with
problematic repressed material. 224 The latter forms of the comedic,
as theorised by Freud, facilitate the subject's socialisation and
submission to symbolisation.
- 127 -
There is a certain congruence between much of the above material
on speech and the sexual and the different vocabularies used in
referring to parts of the body (bouche etc./gueule etc.) by differ-
ent classes as described by Bourdieu (cf. pg. 53 above):
"... the 'popular'/working-class sensibility characteristi-
cally refuses "airs and graces" and prefers what is rudely
"natural"."
Again this is very similar to Freud's comments on differences and
developments in the use of what he calls 'smut' (German: Zote).
"It is remarkable how universally popular a smutty inter-
change of this kind is among the common people and how it
unfailingly produces a cheerful mood ... The uttering of an
undisguised indecency gives the first person enjoyment and
makes the third person laugh.
Only when we rise to a society of a more refined educa-
tion do the formal conditions of jokes play a part. The
smut becomes a joke and is only tolerated when it has the
character of a joke."225
The result of this distinction is that
"When we laugh at a refined obscene joke, we are laughing at
the same thing that makes a peasant laugh at a coarse piece
of smut."225
- surely a piece of "optimum consciousness" on Freud's part. His
education and social position did not give him the means to pursue
the implications of this distinction much further, but he did well
to formulate the role of joke-techniques so concisely.
Given this function of the joke in maintaining social bound-
aries, the question arises of
"... under exactly what coefficient of stress a code of
'decency' breaks apart and allows the human being to fall
steeply down to the recognition of his inalienable
flesh. p227
This "code of decency" which can again conveniently be theorized
with the aid of Bourdieu's notion of cultural capital, 'distinction'
etc., is, however, flexible, and so does not break apart so easily;
it can be suspended;
"We can observe how men of a higher class are at once
induced, when they are in the company of girls of an infe-
rior class, to reduce their smutty jokes to the level of
simple smut."2213
and cohesion of a class valorising the joke-work's function of
maintaining 'decency' through techniques of allusion etc. would
probably not in any case be threatened by isolated breakdowns in
decorum, which could either be attributed to lovable eccentricity or
rejected, and the culprit expulsed.
More interestingly, the acquisition of cultural capital is also
evoked by Legman in his discussion of subversive humour at school.
There are those pupils who "play the game", who (quite possibly
because of a 'supportive' home background) are ready to acquire the
cultural capital on offer, and there are those who do not want to.
The obscene laughter of the latter is then often directed at the
expense of the former. The 'goody-goody' is implicitly recognized
as endorsing the oppressive power.
"Leurs reponses visent enfin
d'ar-ti-cu-ler ,en rgcitant,
ornent leurs redactions, et
avec laquelle ils acceptent
leur propose."229
les 'bons eleves', leur fagon
les nobles sentiments dont ils
d'une fagon ggngrale la docilite
toutes les regles du jeu qu'on
A number of the jokes employed230 by the "erudite imbecile" are
specifically directed to mocking the rewards, to showing their
worthlessness (which, the child has already learned, is effectively
done by using excremental material).
"C'est de la fausse monnaie que la mattresse lui ref ile
le mauvais gleve la refuse et la rend. p231
Whilst it remains true that deconstructive work on symbolisation
in comedy as elsewhere is potentially an important tool in an
- 129 -
oppositional practice, we should not overvalue the potential of the
obscene humour which has its roots in childhood rebelliousness.
Legman himself provides the relativisation:
"Des millenaires de mythologie, de r gligion, d'hystgrie col-
lective (jours de l'an) de littgrature ngvrotique de masse
(science fiction) in'ont pas reussi a dissiper l'ombre mena-
ante d'un pere decide a tuer ou tout au moms a chatrerson
fils, a le punir de l'attraction qu'il eprouve pour la mere,
pour la soeur etc. N'esparons-pas qu'une poignge de plais-
anteries obscanes y parviendront."2J2
(iii) Relation between social, ideological and psychoanalytic
functions. 
Much of the above should have demonstrated the inseparability of
social and psychoanalytic considerations of the comedic. This is
moreover not surprising if we consider the relationship between the
ideological and the psychoanalytic instances. It will, of course,
be impossible to go into great detail here, but it is worth laying
out some of the theoretical parameters which will be implicit in
subsequent work.
Lacanian psychoanalysis tells us that the individual subject is
an effect of language, the result of entry into the symbolic.
Strictly speaking the subject in psychoanalysis is not a thing or a
person, but is defined topographically as a position in relation to
a number of terms representing the instances of the symbolic, the
imaginary and the real. The precise position in which the subject
is held depends on the exact manner of entry into the symbolic, that
is to say on determinants such as gender, position in relation to
mother- and father-figures, negotiation of Oedipal anxiety, castra-
tion fears and anality:
- 130 -
"... this familial ideological configuration is, in its
uniqueness, highly structured, and ... it is in this impla-
cable and more or less 'pathological' (presupposing that any
meaning can be assigned to that term) structure that the
former subject-to-be will have to 'find' 'its' place, i.e.
'become' the sexual subject (boy or girl) which it already
is in advance. It is clear that this ideological constraint
and pre-appointment, and all the rituals of rearing and then
education in the family, have some relationship with what
Freud studied in the forms of the pre-genital and genital
'stages' of sexuality, i.e. in the 'grip' of what Freud
registered by its effects as being the unconscious."233
This way of putting it also helps to reiterate what has already
emerged above, that the way in which early socialisation and the
entry into the Symbolic and a relation to the Law are negotiated are
always culture-specific, in no way absolute or transcultural.
When the subject is constituted in language, then, the entry
into the Symbolic is also an entry into the social and into
ideology. It is here that problems in any attempt to bring together
psychoanalytic theory and a kind of Marxism begin to arise, for
Althusser's notion of the "interpellation" of the subject explicitly
assumes some sort of "always-already" subject and at many points
appears oblivious to psychoanalytic categories:
"That an individual is always-already a subject, even before
he is born, is nevertheless the plain reality accessible to
everyone. p234
At other points, however, this impression is partially dispelled
(the reference to Althusser pg.165 above was not an accident, for
that reason), and it seems instead that Althusser, rather than being
hostile or ignorant about the psychoanalytic ramifications of his
work, simply had not thought those ramifications through. Thus
there have been a number of more of less trenchant critiques 235 of
Althusser's use of psychoanalytic terminology. A fairer assessment
does crop up in one of the critiques:
- 133. -
"It draws upon the term 'imaginary' as used by Lacan, but its
mobilisation by Althusser only acknowledges the inadequacy
of the terms available in Marxism, rather than using the
full implications of the psychoanalytic term. Had he so
used it, Althusser's theory of ideology might have been very
much more effective."238
The 'subject', then, is constituted in terms of class, gender,
race, nation, and the constituted position is then maintained (or,
perhaps, shifted) ideologically.
Ideology in our model is any system of representations in a
specific historical/material context by which an imaginary relation
is constructed for a subject with her/his real conditions of
existence.
"L'ideologie ... est un systeme (possedant sa logique et sa
rigueur propre) de representations (images, mythes, idees ou
concepts selon les cas) doue d'une existence et d'un role
historique au sein d'une societe donnee."237
Although Hirst appears at one point to accept uncritically that
"the imaginary modality of living is necessary because men's
conditions of existence can never be given to them in expe-
rience"238
the imaginary relation is nevertheless the ingredient of Althusser's
theory which simultaneously renders it unprovable/opaque/ theoreti-
cist and creates vital links with psychoanalysis and the uncon-
scious. For the sceptics, the pervasiveness and inescapability of
ideology (is it possible to experience anything outside ideology? is
discourse outside ideology possible?) is no easier (and no harder)
to take than unknowability of the unconscious except through a
reading of symptoms.
Certainly the question of knowability/testability of reality-
status can become highly vexed, and it soon becomes apparent that no
claim can be made about "the real world" which is not itself under-
- 132 -
pinned with ontological assumptions. The most acute forms of this
epistemological scepticism lead to 'conventionalism'.
"The main thrust of the conventionalist attack on empiricism
is that such a neutral observation language cannot in prin-
ciple be found. Experience is never directly given, con-
ceptless."239
In the acutest cases of conventionalism, there seems to be no room
for experience at all:
"The limit case which all conventionalisms more or less
approach is one in which the world is in effect constructed
in and by theory. given that there is no rational procedure
for choosing between theories, relativism is the inevitable
result. Epistemological relativism does not necessarily
entail a denial that there is a real material world. But if
our only access to it is via a succession of theories which
describe it in mutually exclusive terms, then the concept of
an independent reality ceases to have any force or func-
tion."24O
An alternative may be to disallow any distinctions with respect
to 'reality-status', and to
"... understand fantasies (of any description) as one reality
among others. Any attempt to label one phenomenon of human
existence 'more real' than another is arbitrary. 241 (origi-
nal emphasis)
Such problems notwithstanding, I prefer to concentrate here on the
more 'positive' reading of Althusser, on the productive links with a
"politics of the unconscious".
Although all and any representations can be/are ideological,
Althusser also develops a Model of a number of Ideological State
Apparata (ISAs) the roles of which are to articulate a broad "dom-
inant ideology". Such apparata, 242 usually observable most readily
in institutionalised form (family, school, church ...) have the
function of reproducing or reinforcing existing relations of produc-
tion which favour the dominant class interests.
- 133 -
Mention of the family and of education reminds us of the link
between psychological repression (of the excremental, then of other
aspects of sexuality) and family and other social structures alluded
to in the first section of this study (pp.34 ff.) we find that we
have observed the kinship between the psychoanalytic and the ideo-
logical before. The crucial concept is that of the unconscious.
We can underline at this point the exceptional relevance of this
psychoanalytic/ideological relation to filmic representation in
particular. Films have long been compared with dreams because of
the (usually) darkened room and the oneiric suspension of reality
which they encourage; as we know, dreams are among the prime 'symp-
toms' of the unconscious. This assimilation makes films potentially
especially effective as carriers of (invisible) dominant ideologies,
whether they be ideologies 'about' communication itself (the formal
strategies of documentary, the imparting of knowledge through
narrative), or ideologies which run as a sub-text suffusing the more
evident plot content (assumptions about family, religion, gender-
roles etc. which a given film may take for granted or 'work' to
reinforce). Otherwise put, the cinema is ideally equipped to pass
on representations, unconsciously sanctioned by the agencies of the
dominant ideologies, via the individual spectator's unconscious.
To summarise. People are "prepared for ideology" first by the
emergence of the psychoanalytic subject with its access to language
and the Symbolic and with its position in relation to the Law and
the Other, and secondly by the individuating effect of ideology's
'interpellation' by which the individual is constituted as a knowing
subject. These processes are nevertheless profoundly unconscious,
- 134 -
so that ideological messages, beliefs (sets of internalized repre-
sentations) pass more often than not for "common sense". In a
society where one group or class has control over the means of
production, the dominant ideology serves to naturalise that control-
ling relation, to create (or tend to create) an Imaginary relation
common to all that society's subjects in which the relation of
dominance/subservience is seen as timeless, part of "l'ordre des
choses", and reproduction of the existing relations of production is
effected. Oppositional ideologies thus have to work so much harder
to overcome this barrier:
"... one of the effects of ideology is the practical denega-
tion of the ideological character of ideology by ideology:
ideology never says 'I am ideological'."
The crux of this argument, then, is that the ideological comes
to a subject through an Imaginary relation, which is by definition
of an unconscious nature. The situation is conveniently summarised
by Rosemary Jackson:
"Ideology, - roughly speaking, the Imaginary ways in which
men experience the real world, those ways in which men's
relation to the world is lived through various systems of
meaning such as religion, family, law, moral codes, educa-
tion, culture etc., - is not something simply handed down
from one conscious mind to another, but is profoundly uncon-
scious." 244 (original emphasis)
Jackson's analysis of fantastic literature is in many ways an
exemplary bringing together of ideology and the unconscious as
critical concepts; her work is useful here insofar as her insights
are more generally applicable, can be re-read to include other areas
of cultural production. When Jackson discusses Freud's 'Totem and
Taboo' (1913) and writes
"The uncanny represses drives which have to be repressed for
the sake of cultural continuity. Freud regards anything
uncanny, or anything provoking dread, as subject to cultural
- 135 -
taboo. A resurfacing of long-familiar anxieties/desires in
uncanny incidents constitutes a 'return of the
repressed' ..245
we cannot help being reminded of Freud's formulation of the humorous
response as a release of psychic energy freed from repression.
Coming closer to home (bearing in mind the above discussion of the
subversive potential of obscene humour), Jackson finds that
"Fantasies are not ... countercultural merely through (this)
thematic transgression. On the contrary, they frequently
serve (as does Gothic fiction) to reconfirm institutional
order by supplying a vicarious fulfilment of desire and neu-
tralizing an urge towards transgression ... A more subtle
and subversive use of the fantastic appears with works which
threaten to disrupt or eat away at the syntax or structure
by which order is made. .246
To switch back to comedy, these quotes relate nicely to part of an
ingenious though eclectic classification of comedy by Maurice
Charney. Area no.1 is "the discontinuous":
"Comedy depends on the breaking of rational order and causal-
ity. We may abruptly shift perspective and juxtapose sepa-
rate pieces of action as if they belonged with each other.
The time-sequence is flexible and subject-object relations
may be reversed. The overall feeling is one of uneasiness,
since the patterns created are crazy quilts and random
mosaics."247
Once again we find ourselves in Monty Python territory, though
significantly the other conditions are apparently fulfilled but the
"overall feeling of uneasiness" seems relatively weak. We are also
back with nonsense and its potential for deconstruction.
For Koestler, nonsense depends on "the illusion of meaning"
created by the recognition of a familiar form such as a proverb or a
nursery-rhyme but with one word changed, two reversed etc. For
Bergson,
"A comic meaning is invariably obtained when an absurd idea
is fitted into a well-established phrase-form. .248
In both cases the form is somehow inadequate to the content. Freud
- 136 -
also recognizes this as an important source of 'the comic'; his
example of the absurd content inhabiting a standard form is the
following:
"What is it that hangs on the wall and that one can dry one's
hands on?"
- a hand towel.
- no, a herring.
- but ... a herring doesn't hang on the wall.
- you can hang it up there.
- but who in the world is going to dry his hands on a
herring?
-"Well (is the soothing reply), you don't have to."249
Freud's explanation is
"This explanation ... shows how far this question falls short
of a genuine riddle; and on account of its absolute inade-
quacy it strikes us as being - instead of simply nonsensi-
cally stupid - irresistibly comic."25
As we have noted, Freud's conception of 'logic' and its narrow
relation to 'natural' social relations appears to have been rather
restrictive - as also does Bergson's, but it does now seem fair to
describe "... the comic in its extreme form ... (as) the logic of
the absurd." 251 The question of whether appeal to such an other
logic is politically or philosophically progressive or useful is,
however, an open one. As Freud also notes, nonsense largely signi-
fies an attempted return to "childish" pre-logic:
"... it must not be forgotten that the nonsense in a joke is
an end in itself, since the intention of recovering the old
pleasure in nonsense is among the joke-work's motives."252
It is probably a mistake to subscribe to any essentialist view of
'human nature' with respect to pleasure. We may choose to say that
the fundamental instinct is towards pleasure in 'play', hence in
entropic 'nonsense', or we may choose to identify some other
'instinct' as fundamental, for instance
"There is something in the human psyche which commits man to
non-enjoyment, to work."253
Something like this latter assumption presumably underlies those
- 137 -
approaches which are inclined to deny the radicality of 'play'. In
discussing the subversive functions of fragmentary modes of writing
in the fantastic, for example, Jackson identifies the nonsense of
Lear and Carroll as a different more playful mode, more ludic,
therefore not so 'dangerous' to dominant signifying modes:
"Nonsense ... engages the force towards disorder in continual
play. It tends to recombine different semantic units which
remain distinct from one another. It fractures rather than
dissolves, returning to rigidity and separation of individ-
ual units."254
A third possibility stands apart from the above two alternatives; if
there is any 'essential human nature', it is in any case unknowable,
so any attempt to base political evaluation of the 'returning to
play' role of comedic nonsense is based on already partisan assump-
tions. The position which I adopt here is that deconstruction and a
valorisation of play through nonsense are potentially useful tools
for rethinking the subject's position in ideology; whether the
textual and other strategies deployed for the situation of the
viewing subject in relation to the 'nonsense' in Monty Python films
work towards such a rethinking is another matter.255
Another point at which Jackson's work on the fantastic links the
psychoanalytic with the ideological is in her discussion of the
strategies employed (by dominant ideologies or by some kind of
psychic economy) for dealing with the potentially deviant 'other-
ness' which she identifies in the face of fantastic subversion are
outright rejection, polemical refutation, and assimila-
tion/recuperation. The rejection is thus described:
"The dismissal of the fantastic to the margins of literary
culture is in itself an ideologically significant gesture,
one which is not dissimilar to culture's silencing of unrea-
.son. 256
- 138 -
and Jackson goes on to look at some of the ways in which the fantas-
tic has been 'recuperated':
"Those elements which have been designated 'fantastic' -ef-
fecting a movement towards undifferentiation and a condition
of entropy - have been constantly reworked, rewritten and
re-covered to serve rather than subvert the dominant
ideology.. 256 (original emphasis)
An interesting corollary to this model has been suggested by Chris
Powell. 258 Interestingly, the (tentative) model appears to be
equally applicable to the psychoanalytic notion of the subject and
to the hegemonic function of ideologies on a social level. Powell
suggests that there is a gradation of 'coping' mechanisms (psychic
or social) when faced with a deviation from the norm, with some
anomaly.
First, the threat of deviation may be ignored, explained away,
repressed. Ultimately (consciously), no threat is perceived and the
'meaning' of the deviancy is not explained. Secondly, the threat
may impose itself on the preconscious level. A humorous response is
then designed either to "exercise informal control" and nullify the
threat (pp.87-88 above) or to strengthen a group resistance to the
deviancy (pp.101-104 above). Thirdly, the comedic response may seem
inadequate, and the deviancy may be explained away as mental insta-
bility, lunacy, insanity, or as some eccentric/psychological
quirk. 259 Fourthly and finally, the threat may be conceived on a
more 'fundamental' level, as 'evil', as having a spiritual inhuman
source.
The nicest examples of the way this model functions (ignore .-
laugh at	 stigmatize	 as evil) include the media treatment
of Idi Amin, the womens' movement, even events such as conferences
- 139 -
on humour1 260 A more complex example is that of absurd and
offensive humour itself - a possibly/potentially subversive tool
both on individual and social levels. Where such humour is seen as
threatening, it may also be possible to observe the progression from
the (extreme) response of indifference to a superior laughter of
dismissal (and non-understanding? - cf. pg. 127 above), then to a
reassuring determinist linking of the troubling material with
readily assimilable details of the individual (in this case Pyth-
ons') personal histories. Perhaps only the most vociferous defend-
ers of conventional morality have been tempted to invoke satanic
motives for some of the Python infractions. In fact a substantial
campaign was mounted, particularly in the USA, arguing that Monty
Python's Life of Brian was (literally) diabolical. Rabbi Benjamin
Hecht: "I have an idea that it was produced in Hell."261
2.3 Obscene/excremental and grotesque comedicity
At the point in the development of his theory where Freud opens
up the provisional distinction between tendentious and innocent
jokes, he also proposes two types of 'tendentious' jokes: obscene
and aggressive. In what follows we must again bear in mind that
Freud's remarks were written in a particularly 'patriarchal' society
and that, despite his later scathing analysis of the structure of
the family, his work is permeated with assumptions about men and
women which seem strange to us now.
The structure of the 'obscene' joke is based on
"... a further relevant fact that smut is directed to a par-
ticular person, by whom one is sexually excited and who, on
hearing it, is expected to become aware of the speaker's
- 140 -
excitement and as a result to become sexually excited in
turn. Instead of this excitement the other person may be
led to feel shame or embarrassment, which is only a reaction
against the excitement and, in a roundabout way, is an
admission of it. Smut is thus originally directed against
women and may be equated with attempts at seduction. .262
Moreover, Freud here points out the link with infantile notions of
sexuality:
"The sexual material which forms the content of smut includes
more than what is peculiar to each sex; it includes what is
common to both sexes and to which the feeling of shame
extends - that is to say, what is excremental in the most
comprehensive sense. 26i
The joke is then a development in which the threatening psychic
energy associated with this sexual aggressivity can be released
through the fore-pleasure of the joke-technique and a displacement
of the explicit material through techniques such as allusion,
representation by the opposite etc. For this process to operate a
third person is necessary as 'accomplice' for the first; the second
person (la femme qui disparatt) need not be present at all, but is
implicit in the joke-structure:
"Generally speaking, a tendentious joke calls for three
people: in addition to the one who makes the joke, there
must be a second who is taken as the object of the hostile
or sexual aggressiveness and a third in whom the joke's aim
of producing pleasure is fulfilled. 264
Freud also points out that the joke-mechanism as means of dealing
with expression of 'smut' is more highly developed in 'higher'
social strata.
"And here at last we can understand what it is that jokes
achieve in the service of their purpose. They make possible
the satisfaction of an instinct (whether lustful or hostile)
in the face of an obstacle that stands in its way. 265
The obstacle standing in the way is then identified through the
process of repression, which blocks the enjoyment of undisguised
obscenity. Freud's remarks about the more important role of jokes
in more 'refined' circles are correct enough, but are then thrown
into even sharper relief by the admission that
"It is our belief that civilization and higher education have
a large influence in the development of repression .266
We can extrapolate from this the interesting thesis that the phe-
nomenon of jokes (and perhaps the comedic more generally) is closely
linked, through the mechanism of repression, to the kind of social
and cultural values endorsed by a particular 'civilization' and
education. We have already suggested267 that the forms which
repression takes are linked to a social formation and ultimately to
economic determinants. If Freud is right, then, there may be a
direct line between the existence of jokes in particular social
situations (and their use in media) and the economic/ideological
function which they serve. The deliberate flaunting of 'smut' in
comedy, in some Monty Python films specifically (Waitress: "Compli-
ments of the Holiday Inn. Have a nice fucki"; "You want for them to
pull up their skirts and lean over the chair with their legs apart",
both in Meaning of Life), 268 can then perhaps be seen as a
subversion of the dominant rules governing 'tendentious' material;
nevertheless it seems that here any 'subversive' potential is
limited to liberating sexual aggression as sexual aggression. The
determinants producing the male-impulse-to-sexual-aggression-to-
woman are left unexamined and untouched. Although, as we have
noted, intellectual distantiation and the pleasures to be gained
from the Monty Python texts in this area are important, we cannot
ignore Freud's remark that
"... individual components of a person's sexual constitution,
in particular, can appear as motives for the construction of
a joke. A whole class of obscene jokes allows one to infer
the presence of a concealed inclination to exhibitionism in
the inventors; aggressive tendentious jokes succeed best in
people in whose sexuality a powerful sadistic component is
- 142 -
demonstrable, which is more or less inhibited in real
life. 269
We note in Freud's above statement of the purpose of (especially
tendentious) jokes (pp.141-142 above) that both lustful and hostile
instincts are satisfied. The mechanism operating for obscene jokes
is thus seen to work also for hostile jokes. An unfortunately heavy
formulation makes the same point:
"In the case of obscene jokes, which are derived from smut,
it turns the third person who originally interfered with the
sexual situation into an ally, before whom the woman must
feel shame, by bribing him with the gift of its yield of
pleasure. In the case of aggressive purposes it employs the
same method in order to turn the hearer, who was indifferent
to begin with, into a co-hater or co-despiser, and creates
for the enemy a host of opponents where at first there was
only one."27u
If we put this together with Freud's own view that 'innocent' jokes
serve the same basic purposes as 'tendentious' jokes (pg.111 above),
then it seems that Neale is more or less right in himself claiming
"Weber, like Freud, stresses the importance of this tripar-
tite structure, claiming it, again like Freud, as 'paradig-
matic for the joke in general' ..271
Only the word "claim" is a slight exaggeration. The model drawn
from Samuel Weber summarised by Neale describes the three 'joke-
positions' in Lacanian terms:
"The structure is marked by the presence of the following
elements: eroticism, aggression, a (displaced or absent)
object of desire, speech (language, signification), and an
other whose presence and whose reactions are crucial to the
status both of the speech and its speaker. With all these
elements in place, the structure can be read as the struc-
ture of desire itself; language, a speaking subject, an
other (Lacan's 'objet petit a'), an Other (site of the
instances of the symbolic and the Law), and pleasure and
aggression as effects of the relations between them. Smut
is the paradigm of the joke insofar as its structure is the
structure of desire.
What is being referred to are places or points within a
- 143 -
discursive process. And these places or points can be occu-
pied by one and the same individual.n272
There is therefore a sense in which all jokes can be said to be
sexual in an infantile sense, hence to have an excremental compo-
nent. Where the basic tendentious 'material' of the joke is itself
sexual/excremental, and where the allusion-method commonly employed
by the joke-work is partially or completely absent, 'smut' may, as
we have seen above, begin to emerge, but the results of such an
emergence (in films in particular) will depend largely on the
narrative and other strategies deployed within the larger text.
The structure of 'the comic', for Freud, is distinguished from
that of the joke in that it requires only two persons or structural
positions. Thus when a 'first person' observes a person or situa-
tion towards whom/which he/she can feel superiority, a preconscious
comparison is effected with the expenditure of energy which that
first person would need to expend in the same situation.
"The first person compares how he or she would speak or
behave in the same situation and laughter is the result of
the difference. Precisely to that extent, to the extent
that mastery, superiority and a narcissistic investment in
the ego of the first person are involved, so hostility and
aggression are seen by Freud as inherent in all forms of the
comic. ,,273
There are a number of problems with the distinction which Freud
operates between jokes and 'the comic'; as we have seen above, the
definition of 'the comic'-itself is far less rigorous than that of
the joke. A useful situation/critique of Freud's distinction is
furnished by the Neale piece. What may be relevant here is a
similarity between obscene jokes and "the comic and sexuality and
obscenity", namely their common basis in a drive to expose.
Freud's comments on this are rather confused (and anyway limited
to one page) and are scarcely relevant to a consideration of filmic
images. For Freud, the comic is something which is 'found' or
'discovered', often in a person or an event which is only uninten-
tionally funny. He appears not to be concerned with any kind of
performed comedy, least of all a calculated, pre-scripted comedic
text. It has to be admitted that in much of the more detailed work
on Meaning of Life which will follow, the distinction between jokes
and 'the comic' will be deliberately blurred; the Freud-based
material on jokes will be used where a comedic element can be seen
as a joke (and here a fairly free interpretation will be necessary,
since Freud has next to nothing to say about jokes which are partly
or entirely visual), and elsewhere use will be made of the common
ground between jokes and 'the comic', namely the economy in expendi-
ture of psychic energy in relation to more or less repressed sexual
material.
We have already discussed in an earlier section some aspects of
the excremental. Let us recall Bakhtin's observation that
"... urine (as well as dung) is gay matter, which degrades
and relieves at the same time, transforming fear into laugh-
ter." 274
His remarks in this case refer essentially to the laughter which
mocks natural functions and physicality, as part of a defence-
mechanism against "cosmic terror". This terror is a fear of the
elements, of forces beyond human control. The laughter of carnival
then "... transforms cosmic terror into a gay carnival monster."275
The carnivalesque was a mode of expression linked to the people, to
a folk culture.
"Folk culture did not know this fear and overcame it through
laughter, through lending a bodily substance to nature and
the cosmos; for this folk culture was always based on the
indestructible confidence in the might and final victory of
man. Official culture, on the contrary, often used and even
cultivated this fear in order to humiliate and oppress
man. .276
What Bakhtin calls "official culture" corresponds well with the
ensemble of changes (cultural, linguistic, hygienist, economic and
psychological) which were discussed in the first section. We can
now also see that the recultivation of "cosmic fear" referred to by
Bakhtin has driven the laughter underground, ... though 'carnival-
esque laughter', the laughter of community, can certainly be argued
not to have disappeared. By the middle of the 20th Century, deeply-
ingrained class antagonisms may have replaced the cosmos; neverthe-
"the carnivalesque atmosphere which the threat of death and
extinction can evoke combined with the intense social mobil-
isation of the peoples war to produce an immense guffaw at
the paralysing poison of class 277
The system of repression and the particular mechanisms of dreams
and jokes which have developed as coping mechanisms have been part
of the object of study of the relatively recent discipline of
psychoanalysis; yet it is a discipline with its own historical and
cultural determinants, and its object of study perhaps has its
limits. Thus we may agree with a psychoanalytic study like that of
the sequence in The Navigator in which Buster Keaton278 and his
woman friend try to prepare a meal; we may agree that here there is
a repressed anxiety about toilet-training which, by being displaced
onto the more permissible food-preparation and assisted by devices
such as repetition and the fore-pleasures of recognition/expectation
with respect to Keaton and the narrative, is partially alleviated.
- 146 -
In more explicit or celebratory instances of excremental comedy,
however, (the "theme" of mud in Monty Python and the Holy Grai1,279
for example, or the Fishfingers' dinner in Jabberwocky, or the
faecal cabaret of The Ripper Rids in Fassbinder's Teater in Trance 
and Schroeter's Dress Rehearsal), there is perhaps a case to be made
for "laughter in the face of cosmic terror". Let us leave this
question open for the moment.
To return to the 'modern condition' of repression, Gershon
Legman has identified anxiety about sexual and excretory functions
as the source of much childish humour, including, this time, naive
or unintentional humour. To reiterate an insight of Freud's:
"This is, however, the sense covered by sexuality in child-
hood, an age at which there is, as it were, a cloaca in
which what is sexual and what is excremental are barely or
not at all distinguished."29
The significance of primal scenes, early notions of genitality, are
overdetermined by the hitherto more important excremental instance.
Any anxiety with respect to toilet-training and cleanliness is
carried over into the (mis)understanding of genital (hetero) sexu-
ality. This gives rise to unintentional 'jokes' such as the child
excitedly telling (his) friend about what he had seen his sister and
her boy-friend doing on top of the piano, being asked "what did they
do next? and answering "I don't know, I thought they were going to
'go' in the piano, so I went away. 281
"Cette histoire a ceci d'intressant qu'elle rgvale chez
l'enfant un second probleme: l'enfant craint d' gtre puni
pour incontinence fgcale." 281
Unassimilated (hence repressed) anxieties about anality are not
confined to children. Where they exist for adults, the need for
repression is more strictly enforced, and greater is the need for
- 147 -
either 'smut' or for jokes or some other form of the comedic as a
mechanism for release of the trapped psychic energy; indeed as Klaus
Theweleit argues, the unresolved confusion around female genital and
excretory orifices has had (and continues to have) staggering
implications for 'male' institutions such as the army. While
sexual/excremental jokes/songs certainly bear witness to this
anxiety/confusion, 282 fear of female sexuality has engendered the
most rigid defences against shit:
"... the only defence is to 'stand fast' (clamping the but-
tocks tight shut): to think of, and believe in, the nation.
At the centre of this defence stands the prohibition against
any kind of mixing (of men and women, of inner self and out-
side world) ..283
We can also recall, however, the above discussion (pp.124 ff.)
of the child's revolt against authority, and the sexual/anal compo-
nent in humour used for this purpose. Legman here also mentions
instances in which the excremental revolt does not even trouble
itself with the mechanisms of the comedic; naval mythology has it
that many ships' crews have among them a "fantSme trou-de-cul" or
"fantome seme-la-merde" who is responsible for deposits of shit in
strategic/embarrassing places.
"De toute evidence, le Fant8me Trou-de-cul est un heros, et
ses prouesses oedipo-fecales expriment ouvertement, dans un
style sadico-anal, la revanche des matelots sur les offici-
ere. .284
This also recalls the excremental revolt in prisons, schools 285 and
other institutions, where toilet (and other) walls are periodically
found to be smeared with shit, and beyond this the more overtly
'pathological' cases.
Incitements to such revolt have been made by a number of
'respectable' writers, among them Flaubert.
"The challenge to good manners issued by the young Flaubert
was more virulent ... 'Let diarrhea drip into your boots,
piss out of the window, shout out 'shit', defecate in full
view, fart hard ...' Feces played a star role in his Rabe-
laisian schoolboy verbal revolt ..."288
In any case it is in this context quite easy to see openly scatolog-
ical material in literature and films - be it comedic or not - as
such an unsublimated drive to exposure, a legacy of childhood.
Yet, to oscillate again to a more constructive assessment of
excremental humour, the individual preoccupation of a given writer
or performer is rarely an 'explanation' of any but the most anec-
dotal aspects of a particular film. Though the 'treatment' and
choice of subject are to some extent determined by some sort of
individual choice, the subject material is most frequently drawn
from observed situations, observed 'life'.
"Walking down a street in Copenhagen, (Terry Gilliam) saw a
well-dressed conventional couple parading arm in arm; with
them was a snowy white poodle with a plaster stuck over its
bottom. 'Amazing, isn't it - when I draw that people will
say, "Ah, that's not life.""287
Let us turn, finally, to one particular aspect of grotesque
humour of which we shall find many instances in the Monty Python
films and which is accessible to psychoanalytic analysis. Bakhtin
has referred to a pre-psychological "cosmic terror". Norman Holland
has suggested288 that the uncanny is based on infantile material
which may involve an explicit threat to life or body, or an anxiety
about some activity such as masturbation, aggressivity, sex, over-
eating etc. This represents the psychoanalytic version of cosmic
fear. The mobilisation of comedic mechanisms is what turns the
uncanny into the grotesque, and we can readily detect the grotesque
- 149 -
violence of, say, the duel in Monty Python and the Holy Grail and
the grotesque overeating sequence in Meaning of Life. A more
recurrent theme in Monty Python is that of fragmented or mutilated
bodies. Both Melanie Klein and Lacan with their different vocabu-
laries have stressed the early infantile preoccupation with "a
terror of being devoured, torn up and destroyed by her" (Klein),
"... the images of castration, mutilation, dismemberment,
dislocation, evisceration, devouring, bursting open of the
body, in short, the 'imagos' that I have grouped together
under the heading - which indeed seems a structural one - of
'imagos of the fragmented body. "289
Though Lacan seems to see the existence of such Lmagos as absolute,
transcultural, he does suggest that
"... in advanced societies ... it denies respect (itself a
fairly recent cultural development) for the natural forms of
the human body. 29O
We thus seem to have two (extreme) possible explanations for
modern comedic use of fragmentation, dismemberment etc. such as that
of Monty Python. First, it may be an example of such "disrespect"
for "natural" forms, as may also be observed in fashion, in the
fetishism of pornography, even in the symptom-oriented anti-holistic
Western form of medicine. Doses of outrageous bodily fragmentation
such as Gilliam's animations may then function as a form of 'inocu-
lation', a defence against a more painful surfacing of fears of
mutilation. Or secondly, it may be necessary to question Lacan's
description of "natural forms of the human body" and suppose that
prior to the development of modern repression-structures there
(co)-existed ways of thinking of the body in which fragmentation and
fluidity were not a threat. This is reminiscent of Deleuze and
Guattari's anoedipal unconscious, in which
- 150 -
"partial objects are not representations of parental figures
or of the basic pattern of family relations; they are parts
of desiring-machines, having to do with a process and with
relations of production that are both irreducible to any-
thing that may be made to conform to the Oedipal
triangle."291
We are back with the mediaeval grotesque body. Clearly the
representations of fragmentary bodies deployed by Monty Python
cannot simply be seen as throwbacks to the mediaeval grotesque, but
it would probably not be too much to suggest that there are (partly
unconsciously implanted) elements which may tend to subvert modern
notion of the body and to institute a partial return to an earlier
model. As we have recorded above, however, the way in which modern
audiences respond to such an invitation is likely to be another
matter.
2.4 Film/TV
Finally, we shall consider some of the specific ways in which
film and television studies may be able to accommodate some of the
above material on tendentious aspects of the comedic. This will not
constitute any overview of theories of screen comedy/
First we may look at the limitations of Freud's three-person
model for the joke in its application to film. The 'first person'
in the structure is the joke-teller, the addressor. Clearly there
is a problem here with all film and TV comedy except that with
direct-address, cabaret or stand-up joke sequences (though there is
still, in these cases, the role of film or video image in articulat-
ing ideologies of specularity and voyeurism).
- 151 -
"But the author, certainly in film and television comedy, and
I would argue, in comedy in general, is never present to the
third person, the addressee, in the same way as they might
be, for instance, in cabaret or, indeed, in everyday life,
where the teller of the joke is visible to the audience. The
author, in comedy, is a position in the text, constructed in
phantasy by the spectator. The author as such is
absent. 294
As Weber points out, and in this he follows Freud's own admission,
in all potential joke-situations
"the third person, as listener, decides whether or not the
joke is successful - i.e. whether it is a joke or not - and
thus, whether or not the first person really is a first per-
son, an ego, the author, or at least the teller of a true
joke. p293 (original emphasis)
This seems to be the more strongly the case in films.
One attempt to transpose Freudian joke/comic structures to
specifically filmic comedicity has been that of Jean-Paul Simon.294
Though Simon's approach is overly structuralist and tends to neglect
the 'reception' end of comedicity, he does suggest filmic equiva-
lents to Freud's joke- and comic structures. The "film esprit"
(joke-film) depends on play at the level of signification (playful
deconstruction?) which creates a marked second-person position
within the text, allowing the viewer a third-person position. The
"film comique" places the viewer in an unproblematic (?) spectato-
rial position in relation to an "objet comique".
It appears that we may be at liberty to interpret as 'visual/
situational jokes' a number of elements in film/TV which Freud would
never have recognized as jokes. I propose to apply Freud's insights
into psychic processes to instances in Monty Python films where some
form of joke-technique is used; I expect in particular to find
examples of 'faulty reasoning'/nonsense, 'representation by the
- 152 -
opposite .295 and 'allusion' .296 These are in fact types which come
under the general heading of 'indirect representation', 297 and it is
easy to foresee, for instance, that in the Monty Python films we
shall find many 'allusory' (nudge-nudge) joke situations. Given the
empirical audience-based nature of the work which I propose to do
on Meaning of Life, however, it is not at this stage clear how
relevant these distinctions will be.
An interesting subdivision of Freud's 'indirect representation'
is that of representation by the small or very small. For Freud the
crucial point here is the linking of the very small to the "tendency
to economy", giving rise to allusion through metonymy. It is rather
strange that he neglects the importance of exaggeration (towards
'more', 'bigger') in joke-technique and considers it almost exclu-
sively in relation to the 'comparison with others' which he sees as
central to 'the comic'. He briefly considers 'overstatement' 298 as
a subdivision of 'representation by the opposite', but does not seem
to consider that exaggeration is a form of overstatement/ Eastman,
on the other hand, does not refer to the joke/comic distinction, but
sees a close relation between understatement and exaggeration:
"It is only when putting it mildly is not quite putting it at
all that this becomes funny ... it is only when exaggeration
goes beyond some humanly reasonable bounds that it makes you
want to laugh."299
A tentative suggestion can be made that a common device in Monty
Python films is the simultaneous use of understatement (representa-
tion by the small or very small) 30 and exaggeration, resulting in a
sense of incongruity/disorientation (cf. pg.72 above). Thus in the
'First Zulu War' episode of Meaning of Life, Perkins' leg is
supposed to have been bitten off by a mosquito (exaggeration) but he
- 153 -
and the other officers treat it as just a scratch (understatement).
In Monty Python and the Holy Grail Launcelot's (exaggerated)
butchery as he arrives at the 'damsel's' castle is offset by his
subsequent apologies ("sorry ... just got carried away"). This may
be an interesting avenue to explore when we look at the film(s) more
closely.
A second area of study, less immediately relevant here, links
back with some of the Elias, Dolto and Laporte material discussed
above (pp.26 & 43 ff.). At that point we identified the family as
instrumental in articulating a set of ideologies about excrement,
hygiene, cleanliness, togetherness, which were/are broadly support-
ive of a Western capitalist social formation. This function has
been identified one way or another in a number of strands of film
study, perhaps less so in work on comedy. The family and its
ideological complexities are important determinants of melodrama,
for example. Robin Wood identifies the repression at the heart of
the family institution; he refers to the family as
"... the central medium for the transmission and perpetuation
of neurosis in our culture ... that hotbed of neurosis on
which our civilization is founded."301
Mick Eaton also points to the importance of the family in comedic
representation, specifically in situation comedy; Wood, however,
points more directly in his piece towards the way in which the
'family comedy' is a return of the repressed through the comedic.
Behind this general formulation of repression, however, lie a number
of broadly sexual modalities (excremental, aggressive, sadistic,
oral, identity/role, relation to father/Law/mother) the relation of
which to the comedic in film is an area which has hitherto hardly
been touched.
- 154 -
The third area to be considered here is one which has produced a
great deal of earnest debate in general, though again relatively
little work has been done in relation to the comedic. We have
already touched upon the ways in which a refusal to play the sym-
bolic game, particularly in childhood but also in cultural artefacts
insofar as repressions/inhibitions engendered in childhood rarely
disappear completely, can be used to 'fight' dominant models of
socialisation. For Steve Neale, joking itself can be part of a
deconstructing process:
"Insofar as any code specifies a syntagmatic and paradigmatic
order, insofar as any code thus specifies also a set of
relations between a series of signifiers and a series of
signifieds within a particular discursive field (fashion,
decorum, story-telling, cinema, whatever), then any code can
be subject to the process of joking, to the disruption and
rearticulation of those orders and relations."302
We are reminded of Simon's identification (pg.152 above) of the
"film esprit" as a cinematic equivalent of Freud's joke-form. Again
though the proviso has to be made that the usefulness of deconstruc-
tion of this kind is heavily dependent on its interaction with the
particular narrative organization, with the institutional and
viewing contexts.
Which kinds of comedic texts are most likely to prove effective
in problematising the process of symbolisation and the viewing
subject's positionality with respect to ideology? Chaplin (in about
1935) may have been of the opinion that
"humour is a premise ... acquiescence in everything disinte-
grating. Knocking everything down. Annihilating everything
... they haven't any attitude. It's up to date, of course
- a part of the chaos. I think it's transitional."303
Gerald Mast seems to reduce the function of the comedic in a
'comedy' (as opposed to its function in otherwise non-comedy films)
- 155 -
to a rendering of the themes/actions of the film onto a "worthless"
level, so that the unreal nature of what is happening in the narra-
tive is highlighted,
"... leaving the intellect free to perceive the issues of the
work ..."3"
The comedic is thus seen as specifically and fundamentally Brech-
tian, 305 and Chaplin seems for Mast to be more Brechtian than
Godard. This kind of view appears to follow on from Bergson's
thesis that the comedic belongs to the realm of the intellect and
not to that of 'the feelings'. There is no room for the uncon-
scious, and no apparent awareness of the ways in which filmic images
and narratives are themselves constructions and articulations of
various ideologies which as a rule precisely make the unreality and
the constructedness of the images invisible. We have argued above
in the 'Social Functions' section that the comedic does function far
more often in collusion with these naturalising ideologies than
against them.
A more useful springboard for looking at types of deconstructive
comedy has been suggested by John Ellis. He suggests that there
seem to be
"... two kinds of comedy: first that which is aware of lan-
guage and works by deconstructing and recombining it, the
comedy of gags, of illogicality and incongruity; and second
that which rests on a natural language, and instead deals
with social disruption. 306
Ellis does not discuss the theoretical/ideological/political signif-
icance of deconstruction, but his piece is useful in furnishing
examples of films which operate in each of the two ways he suggests.
Thus while the films of Ealing or of Preston Sturges tend to be
"comedies of social disruption", the films of Chaplin, the Marx
- 156 -
brothers or Frank Tashlin tend (for Ellis at least) towards the
illogicality and incongruity which potentially throw language into
crisis; again we can note the resemblance that these two categories
bear to Simon's film-comique and film-esprit. 3" Whilst Ellis was
obviously concerned mainly with Ealing Studios, his distinction can
readily be extrapolated, and it is evident that the Monty Python
films would fall squarely into his "deconstruction" camp, with the
frequent fragmentation of narrative, the foregrounding of illusory
naturalism, the reappearance of the same actors in two or more
roles, the use of surreal images and linguistic associations.
The above strategies are also those used in
"... those texts which use the mechanisms of comedy to pro-
blematise the Law itself, and the narrative mode generally
adopted to articulate its inscription."3"
Neale's concern being the Brechtian project of defamiliarising
capitalist relations. Neale's examples, The House on Trubnava
Square, Happiness, Tout Va Bien etc. are all what might (unpejora-
tively) be called 'serious' comedies, and though the objective which
he describes is a good one to keep in view, it remains significant
that we shall here be dealing with more 'ludic' material. We
return, significantly and appropriately, to the unanswered question
of whether deconstruction through the Monty Python version of
absurdity, through the generation of "sense in nonsense", through
the attempted fracturing of dominant modes of symbolisation and
return to pre-symbolic infantile 'play', constitutes such a use of
comedy "to defamiliarise capitalist social relations."
Terry Gilliam: Domestication of the grotesque
This section was originally designed to include some remarks
about notions of censorship in regard to the sexual and the violent,
a short account of some historical and institutional determinants of
the Monty Python phenomenon, and some notes on the biographical
aspects of individual Pythons most relevant to our grotesque/
excremental concerns. 1 In the event, it has only been possible to
retain the briefest of discussions of Terry Gilliam, the member of
the group whose concerns have been most explicitly relevant, and
whose influence on the development of grotesque/excremental humour
in the TV series of 1969-1974 was arguably crucial. Much of the
fascinating material about Graham Chapman, John Cleese, Eric Idle,
Terry Jones and Michael Palin will thus not appear here.
Terry Gilliam came to Great Britain in 1967 and, after working
for a few months as a freelance illustrator, approached John Cleese
to ask if there was a chance of his working in television. Cleese
put Gilliam in touch with Humphrey Barclay:
"I looked at all his drawings - they were very grotesque, but
being a cartoonist myself I was intrigued by them. We all
got to know him - I remember writing letters to protect him
from being drafted into the American Army, because we felt
that we wanted him around."2
In 1968 Barclay moved from the defunct Associated Redif fusion to
LWT. One of his first productions for this channel was We Have Ways
Of Making You Laugh, on which Gilliam was invited to appear as a
quick-sketch artist, and on which he also (accidentally) began his
animation career:
"... I suggested I make an animated film ... they assumed I
knew how to make animated films, and I assumed they knew I
didn't know ... anyway, I did one, and they really liked it,
and said 'Do another one'. And so overnight I became an
animator on national television t"
This was followed by work on series 2 of Do Not Adjust Your Set 
(transmitted from February 1969) and on ITV's The Marty Feldman
Comedy Machine.
At this stage Gilliam's new-found talent and success with
animation owed much to his use of the cheaper and quicker-to-use
paper cut-outs which eliminated the need to draw out each frame
separately. He seemed to develop a 'feel' for this kind or work and
quickly became proficient. It seems, however, that the simplicity
of the technique compared with conventional animation later became a
source of frustration:
"... it was getting tiresome, because it wasn't fresh for me
any more. The limitations of the technique were getting
boring, and I just wasn't willing to do proper animation - I
just don't have the patience for it."4
and was instrumental in hastening his move into directing films with
flesh-and-blood actors.
It appears that Terry Gilliam was brought into the Monty Python
team by Eric Idle, whom he knew from Do Not Adjust Your Set. His
influence was immediate, and Roger Wilmut identifies one particular
cartoon which may have exerted a great effect on the group's style.
His description of the cartoon is worth quoting in full.
"A clinical description of the cartoon serves only to under-
line its oddity: a man who ignores a sign saying 'Beware of
Elephants' is crushed by a falling elephant; his head, left
sticking out of the ground, is kicked around by a football
team whose heads gradually join his in bouncing around.
These heads then recede until they become mere specks of
dirt, part of an advertisement for soap powder presented by
an animated Enoch Powell. A white sheet, held up by Powell,
- 159 -
becomes the scene of gunfire between a fort and a man on a
horse; this gunfire perforates the packet of soap powder,
which falls like snow - and in fact becomes snow - a snow-
covered scene complete with a stagecoach. An outlaw holds
up the coach, but on his demand 'Hands Up' he is squashed
flat by a huge hand coming out of the coach."5
The cartoon is clearly littered with cultural references (a 'beware
of' sign, a game of football, advertising, a politician, a conven-
tional scene of conflict in a 'Western' setting) but is equally
clearly also a stream of consciousness which could very well be a
dream. This is not the place to attempt any kind of psychoanalysis
of Gilliam, 8 though it is obvious that childhood events are bound to
have exerted an influence on his preoccupations and the forms they
take: why the images of fragmented bodies? Why the mutilations and
the squashings? Gilliam's own comments are revealing:
"A reaction, he muses, to the stultifying perfection of his
adolescent surroundings in California, where 'everything is
based on beauty and health, and the abnormal, the ugly, the
unpleasant are hidden away."7
"Very cathartic. Cheaper than psychoanalysis, less dangerous
than attacking people on street corners."8
In any case the dreamlike stream-of-consciousness technique
"planted in the minds of Palin and Jones the idea that the
whole show might be done in a similar manner, with ideas
simply flowing on, one to the next, instead of the forma-
lised use of sketches with a beginning, a middle and an end,
which had been normal up to then."8
and the results are evident in the often surreal organization of
much of the TV material in particular. A point of interest, how-
ever, is Chapman and Cheese's relative lack of excitement about this
kind of comedicity: their preference remained for sketches with
'internal logic'. This resulted, particularly in the TV programmes,
in a mixture of surreality, of subversion on this level of signifi-
cation, and relatively straightforward 'sketch' material, bizarre
and tendentious though this latter may sometimes have been. Accord-
- 160 -
ing to Wilmut the reaction of audiences to the early programmes was
one of "amused bewilderment". This reminds us of the comments on
'film-jokes' and the film-comic' made above (pg.152) and indicates,
if we accept to work with some Freudian notion of joke- and comic
structures, that the spectator position in the Monty Python TV
programmes is constantly problemalised, oscillating between the
'third person' of the joke in the case of the sur real/decon-
structionist material (including most of Gilliam's contributions)
and the 'second person' in the case of 'comic' situations which
involve humour within a conventional sketch or other structure.
Various sources indicate that Gilliam has been 'influenced' by
Bosch, by Breughel, by Magritte, Dali, 10 and Ernst, though Gilliam
himself claims to have been unaware of Ernst's work until relatively
late in his career. There are references to Merwyn Peake, Lewis
Carroll, Jonathan Swift and Fellini and Gilliam's own preferred
film-makers include Kurosawa, Bergman, Kubrick, Gance, Welles, Lang.
He identifies some innovative (American) 1950s/60s TV work, particu-
larly by Ernie Kovacs, as influential, and cites Buster Keaton's
Sherlock Junior as exemplary in foregrounding the image-making
process. This latter would again correspond to Jean-Paul Simon's
'film-esprit', with its play on signification:
"un des premiers films ... a presenter ce type de travail, de
passage constant de l'&1once (le deroulement diggetique du
film) a l'enonciation (irruption d'autres films dans la
diegese) ..11
An example of Gilliam's own creation of this kind of film-joke is
the episode towards the end of Monty Python and the Holy Grail in
which an animated monster attacks Arthur and the knights in a cave:
there is a cut to Gilliam (the creator) sitting at his drawing-
- 161 -
board, suffering a heart-seizure, at which point the monster natu-
rally dies and the knights are saved)- 2 Earlier, less inventive
examples would include the animation of a man sitting reading (in
And Now for Something Completely Different) with the voice-over
commentary:
".. in a scene of such spectacular proportions that is could
never in your life be seen in a low-budget film like this
... If you've noticed, my mouth isn't moving either."
Gilliam's contributions, then, were critical from the outset of
the first TV series. Though his personal on-screen appearances have
always been limited to helping out with minor characters.
"... his stream-of-consciousness linking ... together with
the sheer savagery of his material, gives the show much of
its style."13
The 'linking' function, though apparently marginal, was important
because it allowed Gilliam a certain autonomy even within the
writing-meetings which the other members of the group, being engaged
in a common script-writing activity, could not enjoy. He was
generally given a starting-point and an end-point for, Bay, a
thirty-second animation link, and left to get on with it:
"Nobody really knew what I was doing until the day of the
actual recording - I'd just arrive with a can of film, and
present it, and generally it seemed to work. 14
Gilliam is aware of the degree of unawareness necessary for his
type of work:
"... the minute I become aware of what I'm doing I've killed
it. ,,15
In this he echoes one of Freud's observations on the conditions for
the release of the 'comic', the absence of
... attention ... focused precisely on the comparison from
which the comic may emerge. In such circumstances what
- 162 -
would otherwise have the most certain comic effect loses its
comic force."16
The preference for 'found images', for a more or less disordered
image library ("I surround myself with lots of things and I absorb a
lot of material, but I don't try to categorise it ... there's a
usefulness to keeping them out of order, because as I'm looking for
one thing I bump into a lot of other things. .17.) is certainly
reminiscent of 1920s/30s surrealist techniques. The 'violence' of
removing a picture from one context (be it a 'serious art book' or a
sales catalogue) and transplanting it into an entirely unexpected
context, the violence inherent in this kind of cut-out/collage work,
is thus overlaid in much of Gilliam's work with the more or less
unconscious violence which is then done to the picture or image on a
diegetic level:
"Gilliam's cartoons are principally noted for their sheer
savagery ... and give the show a violent aspect not normally
.found in a television comedy. 18
In fact any act of (film-making) montage may be seen in terms of the
fragmentation and reassembly of a body, and perhaps Gilliam's work
has only made explicit what Jacques Aumont saw as implicit in
Eisenstein:
"Each of the Odessa steps is a moment of fracture, punishing
and breaking apart the bodies, and in his treatment of the
murder in Crime and Punishment, he insists on using the dis-
torted images produced by a wide-angle lens ... It is as if
the body (and its forms: the letter, the text, matter) is
only there to be murdered, blown up, cut open, broken down,
and put together again ... Montage (and demontage, the
definitive sadistic operation) is more than a systematic
syntagmatic activity, like playing with an erector set, it
is concerned with the very body of things. And every body
only exists to be cut up."19
Both Wilmut and Hewison identify the kinship between the violent
animations and Chapman and Cleese's often 'inherently savage'
- 163 -
sketches, and Michael Palin has noted the usefulness of the 'stron-
ger' material:
"The RSPCA or the Royal Society for the Prevention of Arms
Coming Off should complain to Terry. His humour does have a
savage edge. But I like it, because if we did my stuff all
the time, it would be slightly soft."2
One of Gilliam's own assessments of this 'violent streak' is at the
same time a little simplistic and quite perceptive:
"I try to say it's not me at all, it's the technique - I'm
not sure if that's very convincing ... The thing is,
because they're cut-outs they're very limited - it's like a
Punch and Judy show - the easiest things are violent and
sudden things. I have a feeling the technique and I found
each other ... I would be working literally seven days a
week, and spend at least two nights a week up all night;
about two or three in the morning is when it starts happen-
ing, and I'm usually very angry at the entire world by then
- a lot of pent-up rage comes out."21
If the origins of this rage can to some extent in principle be
psychologised and situated in a particular sociohistorically defined
context, the same can no doubt be said of Gilliam's interest in,
indeed fascination with, the mediaeval period. Though at first
glance the two areas seem unrelated, the combination of the two is
extremely suggestive and returns us to Section 1 of this study and
the history of bodily representations, of the ideology of the body.
Though his conception of the subject still seems to ignore the
importance of historical specificity (pg.150 above), Lacan evokes
the area we are in:
"One only has to listen to children aged between two and five
playing, alone or together, to know that the pulling off of
the head and the ripping open of the belly are themes that
occur spontaneously in their imagination, and that this is
corroborated by the experience of the doll torn to pieces.
We must turn to the work of Hieronymus SosCh for an
atlas of all the aggressive images that torment mankind
While Lacan and Gilliam clearly 'inhabit' the 20th Century and
the models of the body with which they work are therefore in their
different ways products of subject-positions in late-capitalist
social formations, nevertheless there is much about Gilliam's
apprehension of the mediaeval period - "what excites him are (sic)
rich mediaeval images and gothic grotesquerie" 23 - which is highly
reminiscent of the mediaeval grotesque body and the material bodily
principle which we observed above (pp. 7-12 ff.). Of Breughel and
Bosch he has said
"There's great humanity in the paintings - life is just teem-
ing, it's all being lived at an extremely vital level."24
One particular statement by Gilliam is particularly explicit and
identifies a very conscious desire to resuscitate another kind of
physicality:
"It was like the potty-training period of history; with Jab-
berwocky people got very offended by the scatology - the
constant defecation and people peeing off towers, and just
the filth. And yet it was like that - I wasn't making any-
thing up. I've got a book called 'Illustrations From the
Margins of Illuminated Mediaeval Manuscripts' - and here are
all these little monks who have been drawing the Bible, and
they put amazing things in the margins. Extraordinary fig-
ures - strange mediaeval beasties - but the main thing is
that the great majority of the figures seem to be taking a
crap They're just generally showing their bums and stick-
ing their genitalia all over the place - it's very crude and
very funny, and I like it. It's always struck me - monks
sitting there in these abbeys, doing these holy books, draw-
ing all these dirty drawings But they weren't dirty draw-
ings - it was just wallowing in the joys of psysicalness,
and all the things the body can do." 5 (original emphasis)
This is a beautiful statement identifying the 'lower material bodily
stratum' of the mediaeval grotesque, though the exaggeration of
"constant" defecation damages Gilliam's credibility slightly. An
interesting digression at this point, but one which we may take up
again if we look at the scripted 'Adventures of Martin Luther' of
The Meaning of Life later, would be to interrogate the position of
- 165 -
monks with respect to anality. In a chapter on Luther's 'Thurmer-
lebnis', Norman Brown discusses the fact that Luther was in the
'privy' when he first conceived the '95 Articles', and quotes a
passage from Freud:
"Psychoanalysis, alas, cannot agree that it is of no signifi-
cance that the religious experience which inaugurated Prot-
estant theology took place in the privy. The psychoanalytic
theory of infantile sexuality and its sublimation insists
that there is a hidden connection between higher spiritual
activity and lower organs of the body ... Psychoanalysis
has accepted as a demonstrated theorem that a definite type
of ethical character, exhibiting a combination of three
traits - orderliness, parsimony and obstinacy - is con-
structed by the sublimation of a special concentration of
libido in the anal zone, and it is therefore labelled the
anal character. 26
The limitations of Freud's ahistoricity apart, mediaeval monks would
clearly occupy a particular position in relation to mediaeval-
grotesque notions of excrement and the body; Luther's own writing
may or may not have been typical:
"... the anal character of the Devil is sensuously recorded
by Luther (in his 'Table-Talk) with a gross concreteness
that latter-day Protestantism cannot imagine and would not
tolerate."27
The association of the devil (and indeed of the Pope) with shit was
certainly not confined to Luther. In his 'Metamorphosis of Max',
for instance, Sir John Harington, in addition to furnishing a
history of toilets, makes a number or references linking bodily
function, religion and toilets. Thus we find a drawing of a man on
a toilet, attended by the devil, followed by the following poem:
"Mumbled (as was his manner) certain prayers
And unto him the devil straight repairs
And boldly to revile him he begins,
Alleging that such prayers are deadly sins;
And that he show'd he was devoid of grace,
To speak to God from so unmeet a place.
The reverent man, though at first dismay'd,
Yet strong in faith, to Satan thus he said:
thou damned spirit, wicked, false and lying,
Despairing thine own good, and ours envying;
Each take his due, and me thou canst not hurt,
- 166 -
to God my prayer I meant, to thee the dirt.
Pure prayer ascends to him who high doth sit
Down falls the filth, for fiends of hell more fit.n28
Terry Gilliam's own fascination with 'dirty doodles' extends to some
fascinatingly mangled mutations in his own work. 29 These figures
and many of his other creations, in evoking "all the things the body
can do", also recall the unlimited mediaeval grotesque body in their
refusal to be defined by a unitary psysicality. They also recall
for us Deleuze and Guattari's notion of desiring-machines and the
interesting anti-sexual terrorism polemic by Bruckner and Finkielk-
"A la bipartition classique du haut et du bas, du noble et du
bestial, sachons substituer un poudroiement ou le sexe, la
tete et les bras ne soient chaque fois jamais la mgme chose
dggageons-nous de la croyance au fonctionnel, au naturel
(la bouche peut 8tre un sexe, le sexe une bouche, le cul
machine a avaler ...), et plus de recentrement surnois mais
une partialisation a l'infini. Coupons, coupons dans la
belle totalitg de l'organisme ..."3u
Fragmentation can thus be a weapon against the atomisation of
the individual in capitalist society:
"Partial objects unquestionably have a sufficient charge in
and of themselves to blow up all of Oedipus and totally
demolish its ridiculous claims to represent the uncon-
scious."31
Crucially - and this is why Terry Gilliam's work is BO interesting
- this can go together with an evocation of the positive-
regenerative aspects of dirt, of shit. This is not to suggest that
Gilliam's work is necessarily in any way 'revolutionary', but it may
be interesting to compare the way in which his animation works with
Eagleton's description of carnival:
"... carnival involves above all a pluralizing and cathecting
of the body, dismantling its unity into fresh mobile parts
and ceaselessly transgressing its limits. In a collectivis-
ing movement, the individuated body is thrown wide open to
its social surroundings, so that its orifices become spaces
- 167 -
of erotic interchange with an 'outside' that is somehow also
an 'inside' too. A vulgar, shameless materialism of the
body - belly, buttocks, anus, genitals - rides rampant over
ruling-class civilities; and the return of discourse to this
sensuous root is nowhere more evident than in laughter
itself, an enunciation that springs straight from the body's
libidinal depths. 32
In the above reference Gilliam speaks particularly of his own
film Jabberwocky (1977) and of the "dirtiness" of the period. Though
it may have been "mildly over the top excrementally" 33 Gilliam
himself feels that
"... there are situations when people are very funny reliev-
ing themselves. There's nothing in the film you wouldn't
find in a Breughel painting ..."34
The question of offence, and of whether the Python team set out,
in their TV series and in the films, to shock their audience, is a
difficult one. Terry Gilliam was aware of a certain need for
challenging/shocking material:
"We've got to maintain a certain level of offence; otherwise
we're just entertainers. It's one way of proving to our-
selves that we're not just in it for the money."5
While implicitly agreeing with this view, John Cleese has said that
by the third TV series (first transmitted 19.10.72 - 18.1.73), the
quality of the writing had tailed off:
"... in his opinion the search for new ideas was making them
thrash about, exploiting the strange and violent rather than
the funny..36
A substantial audience had, however, become accustomed to the
'violent' sketches (or else the sketches appealed to already-
existing sensibilities):
"The intensity of the writing is in many cases matched by a
noticeably increased savagery which may partly have spilt
over from the cartoons. By now the audiences were used to
this sort of thing and ... is typical in being greeted with
laughter with no hint of restraint ..."37
- 168 -
While Cleese has thus admitted to a tendency to overuse 'shock-
ing material' but has always denied the intention to shock, Graham
Chapman has explicitly identified a desire to subvert and to shock:
"I think if the authorities had been aware of what we wanted
to do right from the beginning we would never have been
allowed to do the programme."9
In speaking of Monty Python's Life of Brian he has said
"It's funny ... we don't deliberately go out to offend.
Unless we feel its justified. And in the case of certain
well-known religious, it was justified."39
Similarly, an explicit part of Eric Idle's project was the potential
role of humour in the breaking of taboos:
"If anything can survive the probe of humour it is clearly of
value, and conversely all groups who claim immunity from
laughter are claiming special privileges which should not be
granted. '
Finally, an apparent 'joke' remark, made by Idle about the difficul-
ties of early audience reactions on the Pythons' first North Ameri-
can tour:
"... that's the reason we all got into the business in the
first place ... to find something so funny that nobody dares
laugh." 41 (original emphasis)
Grotesque and Excremental Humour:
Monty Python's Meaning of Life.
Volume II of 3 Volumes
Janis Udris M.Sc M.A
Submitted for the degree of Ph.D
University of Warwick
Department of Film Studies
December 1988
Volume II 
- Section 4. Psychosociological models and methodologies:
preparation for audience research 	  170
4.1 Measurement
4.2 The research
4.3 Problems
- Section 5. The development of a methodology for a study of
a Meaning of Life audience 	  232
- Section 6. The research: watching and talking about Monty
Python's Meaning of Life 	  261
6.1 Introduction to the section
6.2 Preparation
6.3 Procedure
6.4 Modes of analysis
6.5 Analysis of tape transcripts
6.6 The Humour Appreciation Test
6.7 The Mood Adjective Check Lists
- Conclusion 	  411
- References 	  416
- Bibliography 	  471
Psvchosociological models and methodologies: preparation for
audience research.
The following is an account of work-in-progress aimed at devel-
oping a methodology suitable for studying audience response to the
grotesque/excremental/violent/absurd comedic elements of our Monty
Python film. Though it may become clear that some strands of the
research material studied are not particularly relevant, at this
stage I shall try to give a more or less complete account of what I
have found thus far.
"It is to the highest degree probable that the subject's ...
general attitude of mind is that of ready complacency and
cheerful willingness to assist the investigator in every
possible way by reporting to him those very things which he
is most eager to find, and that the very questions of the
experimenter ... suggest the shade of reply expected. Indeed
... it seems too often as if the subject were now regarded
as a stupid automaton."1
The necessarily incomplete survey of the research literature
which I have so far conducted reveals a reluctance on the part of
many workers in the field (at least until the 1970's) to engage
fully with Freudian-based notions of humour 2 or the comedic ("the
psychoanalytic terminology is not generally accepted"). 3 Neverthe-
less most of those studies can be read across the following evalua-
tion, part axiomatic, part hypothetical:
"In enjoying themes of repressed behaviour, the audience's
problem is not to fool others about his motives but to fool
the self. Moralistic self-censorship prevents the conscious
enjoyment of themes of repressed motivation. It appears ...
that the pleasure provided by the incongruous form of jokes
distracts attention from a full awareness of their taboo
content ... The funniness provided by tendentious content
is inversely related to the audience's awareness of its
presence and nature."4
- 170 -
Much of the survey which follows will be concerned with the asser-
tions in the second part of this quote, and in the context of our
own research we shall want to look at what kinds of 'repressed
behaviours' can form the basis for comedic enjoyment, and why such
comedy sometimes does not work
"Kris suggested (1952) that when impulse humour 'falls flats'
and the intendedly humorous material evokes discomfort or
disgust instead of humorous pleasure, it is because internal
inhibitions have impeded Impulse expression."5
We can note in passing that, though we shall be concerned primarily
with 'discomfort or disgust', there is another mode of 'coping' with
threatening material, an alternative to the flight into repression.
This alternative is a bluff investigative/intellectualising
strategy, identified among others by Donn Byrne. 6 It will not be of
much (immediate) relevance here, but it constitutes an echo of our
own work on anxiety above (pg.77), of Ferenczi's remarks about the
anal-economical origins of thought processes, and of Constance
Penley's comments on epistemophilia.
Two general problems with this stage of the research should be
referred to at the outset. The necessary incompleteness mentioned
above is of course due largely to the bewildering volume of (more or
less) relevant literature and to the lack of time at my disposal,
but another point is the unavailability of some of the (most inter-
esting) sources. 7 Some numbers of apparently anodyne periodicals
appear simply not to exist in the libraries I have consulted
(including the British Library), whilst others are housed on
microfilm in American research Institutes.
The second problem is more substantial, but certainly not
insuperable. Very little of the detailed audience-based psychoso-
ciological research done on comedy or humour has included cinematic
comedicity, and certainly not in its specificity (cf. pg.152 above
for some reference to Jean-Paul Simon's work on cinematic equiva-
lents to Freudian notions of 'joke' and 'comic' forms). The main
exception I have found is Vincent Nowlis, 8 who has described various
experiments by himself and by others on the ways in which films
(frequently extracts) can affect subject performance on Mood Adjec-
tive Checklists (more of these below). The fact that Nowlis' work
- in this respect at least - is not of especial interest is signifi-
cant; our quest at this stage is for theoretically adequate ways of
'measuring' response to comedic stimulus, and of 'measuring' some-
thing about the disposition of the subject (before and/or after
exposure) in relation to a hostility/anxiety/sexuality/anality
complex. The specificity of the Monty Python film will, of course,
influence the form of the ultimate measuring devices, but at this
stage there is a prior set of methodological choices to be made.
Between this introduction and the conclusion to the section
there will be three central parts. The first of these will deal
with the above-mentioned measurement, initially in general terms
then in terms of specific techniques. The central and most bulky
part will be concerned with "quantifying Freud", with quantifying
amusement/appreciation of humour in relation to quantified anxiety,
inhibitions, hostility ... This will be followed by a section
discussing some of the problems thrown up by the research, and by a
brief conclusion.
4.1 Measurement
There exists in the literature a certain tension between two
modes of' observation, two ways of gaining access to some kind of
measurement of variables such as anxiety-levels and amusement.
The less favoured of these is the behaviourist approach, which
would seek to link appreciation of a joke, say, to objectively
observable changes in the subject's demeanour. These may be laugh-
ter, smiling, or some other change in facial expression, 9 or they be
less visible but no less 'measurable' changes such as skin tempera-
ture, electrical potential, or pulse rate. Where such methods have
 been employed they have rarely been used without resort to other,
corroborative, methods.
The other, much more favoured, mode involves 'self-reporting',
the assessment of experience (in a 'primary' instance at least) by
the experimental subject her/himself. Chris Wilson's anti-
behaviourist polemic unearths as many problems as it obliterates:
"It seems perverse and illogical to reject experience as
problematic and concentrate on objective data, as do the
behaviourists."1
"... neither can be measured objectively, for both are regis-
tered and monitored in the experience of the experi-
menter." 11
and betrays a blind-spot the origins of which (idealism of experien-
ce-as-transparent or careless thinking?) are of no concern here:
"Only when psychology dispenses with psychologists can it
become an 'objective' science."-2
Who would replace the psychologists? Still, granted that
"intuitively, we know that jokes may be appreciated below the
threshold for overt expression."13
- 173 -
it does seem right to give at least heuristic priority to experience
and to go along with the assertion that
"experimental findings indicate that self-report is more
valid and reliable than behavioural or physiological data."
... "Apparently, ratings are a more consistent and reliable
measure of humorous responsiveness than expressive behav-
iour. The choice of self-report as dependent variable seems
well vindicated. 14
Support for this view comes from, among others, Walter O'Connell and
Martin Orne. In commenting on his use of a 0-4 scale in the Wit and
Humour Appreciation Test (WHAT), O'Connell writes
"The rationale for such a scale of preferences comes from
psychoanalytic studies of wit and humour that regard 'impli-
cit laughter' and appreciation as the key response, rather
than more overt measures."15
Martin Orne's preference is for post-experimental interviews; 15 the
major difficulties of such a technique will be considered in the
'problems' section below. It does appear that some form of self-
reporting method will have to be developed for the Monty Python
research, just possibly supported by some more or less crude behav-
ioural observation (e.g. laughter, facial expressions). If such a
combination of methods is used, it will have also to be remembered
that, as Young and Frye have found, the overt laughter-response and
covert amusement-ratings are probably not affected by the nature of
the social situation in the same way; 17 the indications are that
laughter, a social response, is facilitated by group situations
whereas private written appreciations are not significantly affected
by such a variation in the experimental context.
Self-reporting, then, is used to try to assess something about the
perception of comedic elements by experimental subjects. This
something is amusement, funniness, humorous appreciation, and it
- 174 -
seems that these terms can be used more or less interchangeably. It
is important to note that the reporting of the amusement or the
appreciation should be private/anonymous, particularly in the
absence of adequate monitoring of group interactions.
"To the extent that we actually were successful in minimising
subjects' real or imaginary perception of external social
pressures, it seems reasonable to interpret the results in
terms of intrapsychic defence processes."18
The question of how it is possible to 'know' how successful this
kind or enterprise 'really' is, and of subjects' attitudes to
assurances of anonymity are real and should be looked at; we shall
however accept at this stage that private self-reporting methods, as
well as being susceptible to close experimental control, are likely
to give more readily usable results.
Let us now look at some of the specific techniques which have
developed in and around this field. The first two sub-sections will
look at some ways of measuring perceived funniness, amusement etc.,
and the sub-sections c) to f) will be concerned with measurement/
definition of personality traits related to anxiety, hostility,
sexuality etc. The final sub-sections will point towards some
additional methodological aids.
a) Mirth Response Test
It seems that procedures for designing and carrying out exper-
iments on humour-appreciation were elaborated by Cattell and
Luborsky (1947) and by Redlich, Levine and Sohler (1951). 19 There
are two references to the apparently definitive Redlich Levine and
Sohler work which point to a problem typical in this field:
- 175 -
"In a recent psychoanalytically oriented approach to the
study of humour, Redlich, Levine and Sohler (1951) developed
the Mirth Response Test."2
"Two existing tests have attracted considerable interest as
research tools in the field of the comic but neither follow
the Freudian paradigm of humour ..."21
This is symptomatic of much of the literature in that where psy-
choanalytic/Freudian notions of psychic economy/repression are
mobilized, this is far from always in conjunction with an adequate
theorisation of the psychoanalysis of the different comedic tropes
of wit, the comic, and humour.
It is thus not entirely clear what is specific to the Mirth
Response Test. Direct and indirect references to it are scattered
around the literature, and Strickland and Doris and Fierman in
particular have acknowledged its use, though many other pieces of
work are obviously derived from the concept.
"The test consists of a series of cartoons that have been
rated by judges along the dimensions of aggression, sex, and
nonsense. From a subject's ratings of the humorousness of
each cartoon, his score on these three components can be
obtained."22
Defined in this way, the MRT is a flexible tool, but this flexibil-
ity is perforce accompanied by a number of problems. Several
research accounts are at pains to describe how the "judges" were
teachers/professors of psychology (or at the very least students
specialising in such a subject_ areal) (hence "experts") and how
elaborate and stringent selection tests were applied to the humorous
instances so that only those cartoons/jokes which were more or less
unanimously selected as belonging to a desired category were
included in the study. What assumption does such a preselection by
'experts' make about those experts' impartiality or humour prefer-
ences? How are the dimensions of aggression, sex and nonsense to be
- 176 -
defined? The humour-appreciation can be on one of a variety of
scales: Strickland used a "15-point graphic scale that ranged from
not funny to extremely funny", 23 whilst Byrne24 was not alone in
using a 4-point scale. What are the rationales for different sorts
of scale? These kinds of questions will permeate much of what
follows. The question of what happens to the MRT if we branch out
from 'cartoons' leads us to WHAT.
b) Wit and Humour Appreciation Test
We have noted O'Connell's observation that the MRT as developed
by Redlich, Levine and Sohler failed to engage with Freudian notions
of humour. Consequently, for his own project
"... a Wit and Humour Appreciation Test was developed around
forms of jests that follow deductions from psychoanalytic
theory. ,,2
Though O'Connell's conception of 'humour' is rather vague (and in my
view erroneous) and its use is complicated by the seemingly unac-
knowledged use of violent/hostile elements in certain instances of
'humour', WHAT does at least put the distinction between wit/jest/
jokes and other comedic forms on the agenda. Bearing in mind also
Jean-Paul Simon's distinction between film-jokes and the film-comic,
this may prove useful.
The work of Earl Dworkin and Jay Efran, 26 though not citing any
method as a direct source, contains elements which place it closer
to WHAT than to MRT; in its eschewing of individual jokes or
instances of wit it is perhaps an example of HAT A selection of
solo album tracks by various comedians were presented as instances
of 'humour' and subjects were asked to respond not to individual
- 177 -
jokes but to the humorous track as a whole. This in itself consti-
tutes a departure from the simple cartoons or jokes used in MRT's.
Another distinction with respect to MRT (though also to O'Connell's
WHAT) is the oral delivery of the comedic material. Whilst this is
of interest because it suggests that determinants such as voice
inflection, timing and 'performance' also need to be taken into
account in oral (hence filmic) humour, Dworkin and Efran seem
unfortunately not to have considered these implications of their
choice of material.
c) Thematic Apperception Tests (TATs) 
A method for determining personality tendencies through the
themes perceived by subjects in (usually) images was originally
developed by Henry A. Murray 27 but was soon adopted, adapted and
improved, and before long became a very common projective technique,
recently much used in conjunction with Rorschach tests. The basic
method consisted of showing a subject one or several pictures of
more or less narrative potential, and posing a series of questions
to prompt the construction of a story around the picture(s). An
example would be a line-drawings of two figures lying on the ground,
with the questions "Who are the people in the picture?", "Where are
they?", "What brings them here?", "What happened next?" initiating
the construction of a narrative. The possibility of variations in
technique is obvious and clearly constructive: subject responses may
be written, and the experiment may be audio- or video-recorded.
There is great scope for inventiveness in selection of pictures and
of prompting-questions for work on specific aspects of personality.
As Gardner Lindzey notes, 28 practitioners of TATs tended to
become cut off from the debates happening in the mainstream of
psychology and psychoanalysis, and certain assumptions underlying
the validity of TAT became axiomatised: conclusions and extrapola-
tions from TATs consequently ran the risk of being psychologi-
cally/theoretically invalid, and if we are to contemplate using any
variant of TAT in assessing subject attitudes to (say) aggressivity,
absurdity, excrement than it is important to be aware of what the
risks are.
One particular assumption identified by Lindzey is that other
related personality traits can generally be inferred from visibly
projected material. At this point (and this may be an unfair
appraisal based on insufficient information) suspicions begin to
form about the notions of 'personality' being deployed. Underpin-
ning TAT seems to be an idea of personality as consisting of traits
and facets which can be observed more or less clearly by control of
the (image) environment, but which are basically static; an individ-
ual can be defined, fixed, if a skilful reading is made of the
symptoms revealed in the TAT. No doubt work has been done with TAT
on personality change, but it seems at this stage that the Mood
Adjective Checklist which we shall look at in the next subsection
may be a more flexible, less problematic device. Nevertheless, seen
in a non-programmatic light, Murray's original conception of TAT can
certainly look attractive:
"(His) instruments typically do not limit the response alter-
natives of the subject by means of pre-determined categories
but rather they permit and encourage a full and subjective
exposition on the part of the subject. Imagination and fan-
tasy are permitted full participation by these techniques.
They provide the investigator with a fullness of data that
- 179 -
is at the same time richly promising and complexly discour-
aging."29
Attempts have been make to control the disheartening complexity
of open-ended TAT data, particularly by replacing open-ended ques-
tions such as "how do you think this person feels?" with structured
multiple-choice answers designed to reveal specific character
traits. One such attempt is that of George Stricker, 3 whose
Objectively Scorable Apperception Test (OAT) proposed description of
slides/images which were structured in the dimensions of aggression,
rejection, insecurity, dependency, and 'neutral'(?). Leaving aside
the origins/rationale of these particular categories, a major
problem must be how to ensure that the images are 'equipotential'
for the five (perhaps four non-neutral) response types, that a
particular image does not by some semic suggestion favour, say, a
response indicating projected 'insecurity'. In Stricker's words,
"The effort to ensure that the response options were equipo-
tential for choice increased the likelihood that the even-
tual rank ordering, since the test is of adequate reliabil-
ity, would largely be the product of a projective pro-
cess. .31
The effort was doubtless made and the likelihood of validity was no
doubt increased, but an adequate solution and a complete equipoten-
tiality seem impossible given the polysemy of any image over and
above the personality make-up of any notional spectator. It must
not be overlooked that the same problem exists also with the origi-
nal TAT, where even a simple line drawing can favour a certain
interpretation by deployment of subtle cultural codes.
Stricker used aggression-inducing film to test the validity of
his pre- and post-aggressed OAT scores. He did this by seeking
correlation with scores obtained using MACLs.
d) Blackv Test
O'Connell refers to a device for identifying areas of psychosex-
ual anxiety called the Blacky Test. This was developed in 1950 by
G.S. Blum, 32 and a description of its use is furnished by one of his
research students, Esther Frankel.
Though it is difficult, without a great deal more detailed
research, to compare the sketchy accounts available of precisely how
the two methods function, it seems that TAT and the Blacky Test both
use series of potentially narrativistic pictures to elicit responses
from the subject, and clearly both aim at insight into the subject's
'personality'.
The Blacky Test is designed to identify effective disturbances
of a sexual nature. The six aspects of sexuality which are identi-
fied are of classical Freudian origin: oral eroticism, oral sadism,
oral sadism (including expulsiveness and retentiveness), Oedipal
intensity, castration anxiety/penis envy, and narcissistic/anaclitic
love-object.
While in the TAT 'line-drawings' (of unspecified subject-matter)
are always referred to, it appears that the Blacky Test (originally
at least) was more standardised:
"12 cartoon drawings depict either a stage of sexual develop-
ment or a type of object relationship within that develop-
- 181 -
ment in the life of a dog named Blacky ... Supporting char-
acters are mama, papa, and Tippy, a sibling figure."3i
Responses to these cartoons could then be used to determine the
degree of subject disturbance in the above sexual areas.
While in the light of more recent developments in psychoanalytic
theory, we may wish to question the original categories (male
eroticism etc.), the Blacky Test is, in its relative 'simplicity',
an attractive tool. The simplicity is, however, deceptive. It
should perhaps be no surprise that Frankel gives no detail of
precisely how anxieties in the various sexual areas are inferred
from subject responses to the pictures of dogs; presumably a more
than passing acquaintance with analysis is required in order that
one may make the necessary interpretations/ It does seem that the
idea of using either TAT or the Blacky Test in the current research
may be a little too ambitious.
e) Mood Adjective Checklists (MACLs) 
Around 1957 Vincent Nowlis and Russell Green (op. cit.) were
responsible for developing a method for constructing 'mood' profiles
of individual subjects. The technique consisted essentially of
asking subjects to assess their feelings at the moment they read
each of a number (usually between 30 and 120) of adjectives describ-
ing mood, scoring their response on a 4-point scale of "definitely",
"slightly", "unclear or don't know", or "no". Instructions gener-
ally included "work rapidly ... Your first reaction is best."34
At first sight this certainly looks like an attractive tool, not
least because
"... in everyday situations the individual may be disposed to
express verbally only one aspect of mood, but the MACL
attempts to elicit within a very short period verbal behav-
iour that applies to many aspects of mood."35
Nowlis is at pains to stress that simplicity both of test format and
instruction are essential, also that a wide range of adjectives
covering a variety of 'moods' is preferable to a limited selection,
even if the object of study is, say, hostility. The test appears
quick and efficient. A further virtue may be its non-interference
with other variables, though Wilson is less sure of this:
"This process of reporting drive may, though, reduce the very
motives it measures. Singer (1968) observed such an effect,
and discarded the humour ratings of subjects who had com-
pleted a checklist before receiving the humour."36
The reference to 'reporting drive' brings us to a more problematic
(but essential) aspect of the MACL, namely its organization - at
least in its original form - around a set of bipolar dimensions: as
usual one can enquire where these dimensions came from They were
activation/deactivation, pleasantness/unpleasantness, positive
social orientation/negative social orientation, and control/lack of
control, and in the initial versions of the MACL 129 adjectives
corresponding to these eight categories were chosen, together with
ten others the function of which was to monitor attitudes to the
test and to monitor 'other feelings'.37
When subject responses to the MACL were subjected to statistical
analysis, twelve 'factors' were identified around which the
responses appeared to be structured. What was interesting, however,
was that there was no statistical evidence of the bipolar attribu-
tion of checklist words to 'opposite' adjectives within any one
- 183 -
'factor'. Thus the subjects who marked themselves as "happy" did
not necessarily also circle "not sad"; "not anxious" did not corre-
spond to "relaxed". What are we to make of this? Certainly it
seems that
"... it suggests that aspects of mood commonly believed to be
interdependently opposed to each other may be functionally
independent."38
While this may indeed be true, at least part of the problem must
also be the imperfect polarities of the words actually chosen/used
to describe elements of mood. Words are always impure, subject to a
degree of confusion, and other words could always have been used.
Indeed, and this is a point not mentioned by Nowlis in this piece,
the adjectives must be chosen for their comprehensibility for a
particular set of subjects: what would most British subjects now
make of a descriptor such as 'clutched up'? Ideally the adjectives
would need to be pre-tested to ensure their 'legibility'.
Nevertheless two of the 'factors' identified by Nowlis may be
useful to us. The factors of 'anxiety' and 'aggression' were both
attended by relatively high statistical significance in the way
responses to words such as fearful, jittery, startled, clutched up,
shocked, helpless, weak, downhearted, insecure, frustrated (in the
case of 'anxiety') were distributed. Other sets of anxiety-related
adjectives which Nowlis notes as having been used in MACL research
are tense, nervous, shaky, on edge, 38 afraid, desperate, fearful,
frightened, nervous, panicky, shaky, tense, terrified, upset,
worrying. 40 In addition to this, Cattell and Scheier41 noted that
the following self-report variables were loaded on 'anxiety': higher
willingness to admit common failings, higher susceptibility to
annoyance, lower ego-strength, less confidence in untried perfor-
- 184 -
mance, lower self-sentiment, higher ergic tension. If one of our
hypotheses is that grotesque/excremental humour can function to
release anal tension/anxiety but that in instances where it is
rejected and found unfunny anxiety in relation to anality may be
increased, then subject responses to adjectives such as those listed
above before and after an instance of grotesque/excremental humour
could well furnish interesting evidence.
In fact there are several instances of films (either whole or in
extract form) having been used in before-and-after MACL experiments.
Thus Pomeranz (cf. footnote 7 above) used film of a sinus operation
to induce anxiety to enable him to compare before-and-after MACL
responses. Other films which have been used to investigate clusters
of adjectives (Nowlis"factors') include Harold Lloyd's The
Freshman, Bunuel's Los Olvidados, a film from Hitchcock's TV series,
and The Oxbow Incident, High Noon, A Walk in the Sun, and docu-
mentaries on the Nurenberg Trials and on Corn Farming in Iowa. 42 It
is significant, however, that in all of these instances the film
material was used in the course of research on MACLs, their develop-
ment and validity. My interest, on the other hand, would be in
using MACLs in order to elaborate how a particular film (or extract)
works; the process would in effect be turned on its head. Nowlis'
own concluding remarks are a useful relativisation of the MACL
method:
"... I cannot, however, recommend that it be used as the pri-
mary or sole index of the dependent variable or variables in
a study ... Yet like change in atmospheric pressure in the
prediction of weather, that which is trivial in one way may
incidentally be tied in with so many co-varying phenomena
that it can be put to important but limited use."43
f) Self-Activity Inventory (SAI) and Self-Ideal (SI) scores
O'Connell also used a device for measuring 'adjustment', which
he took to be inversely related to repression. The rationale for
the Inventory is that
"... tension is experienced when a person is aware of the
discreElancy between his self-concept and his ideal con
',-cept. 44
so that it can be predicted that
"... the greater the discrepancy (high S-I score) the greater
the anxiety or tension experienced. A number of studies
have indicated that the S-I score is inversely related to
the level of adjustment and of stress tolerance, and signif-
icantly correlated with psychometric tests of anxiety."45
The notion of a quantitative score for self-image/ideal image
discrepancy is an intriguing one, but unfortunately O'Connell does
not elaborate on precisely how the scores were obtained; his results
also led him to question the assumption that high S-I discrepancies
necessarily correlated with repression or maladjustment in any
straightforward way. In his concluding remarks he concedes that
very low S-I scores could still be accompanied by extremes of
repression.
g) Ipsative Scores
The above use of self-concept as a yardstick for measurement is
a stepping-stone to the idea of ipsative scoring, in which each
subject becomes her/his own control and scores are 'internally'
standardized.
A major problem in much psychosociological research is the
selection of valid control conditions: if a statistically signifi-
- 186 -
cant change in anxiety-score is observed for a sample of subjects
who have viewed, say, a slapstick comedy film, it is necessary to
ascertain whether the change has been due to the film, to some other
experimental effect, or to extrinsic/random causes. Since any
experiment can only ever actually be performed once 46 (next time it
will be with 'different' subjects, at a different point in
time/history, the manipulation of the variables can never be com-
pletely replicated etc.), the usual practice is to select a 'paral-
lel' group of subjects with whom an identical experiment is carried
out, but with the variable kept constant. The assumption here is
not only that the rest of the experiment can be precisely repli-
cated, but, crucially, that for the purposes of the experiment the
control subjects are identical to those in the experimental group.
The alternative to this method is to build the control into the
experimental situation for each individual subject by the use of an
'ipsative dependent variable'. Thus in an experiment on the effect
of a pause before the punchline on reported amusement,
"... the dependent variable for each subject was: mean rating
of experimental jokes minus mean rating of control jokes."47
Some form of this method could prove attractive in our later
research, not only for theoretical reasons but because of the
(likely) limits on numbers of subjects and on the additional person-
nel necessary for carrying out other forms of control experiments.
h) Use of 'observers' 
An interesting supplementary device which O'Connell seems to
have been one of very few to use is the 'planting' of observers in
- 187 -
the groups of experimental and control subjects.
"In order to provide the E with objective evidence of class
behaviour to supplement his own observations, eight under-
graduate students were asked to observe and note in writing
the reactions of the classes. All eight observers were
unaware of the purpose of the experiment but concurred
unanimously in their views as to the widespread feelings of
anxiety and suppressed hostility in these stressed
classes. "48
At the very least such a measure would provide a built-in monitoring
device ensuring that the crasser forms of methodological malpractice
are avoided
4.2 The Research
This central sub-section could be entitled 'Quantifying Freud'.
Though there can (and should) be no agreement about the unproblem-
atic use of Freudian models, I believe that they do furnish us with
a very insightful account of the psychic economy which underpins our
appreciation of the comedic in its various forms. As Chris Wilson
observes, "Freud's theory implies a quantitative argument", 49 and
potential amusement at a comedic element is seen as directly linked
to the intensity of repression, the amusement being mediated by the
ease of lifting of the repression. The degree of amusement will
then increase with the strength of the repression lifted, but since
at high levels of repression the lifting is less likely to be
effected, the amusement is consequently also less likely. This
relation can be represented diagrammatically in the following way:5
Rx Ry
probability of
lifting repression
: (scale 0-1)
potential	 ..
0 -9 E /amusement	 N \	 ..*'..'(arbitrary	 n
scale 0-1)	 \
nn     T . arap
Fio.2 Diagrammatic representation of the
relationship of repression and amusement
predicted by Freud's theory.
Given the probability of repression being lifted and the potential
amusement consequent on the lifting of repression, it is reasonable
to relate these mathematically: the probable (or average) amusement
at any particular level or repression is the potential amusement
multiplied by the probability of the repression being lifted. Thus
at levels of repression Rx and Rx the probable amusement would be
0.9 x 0.1 = 0.09 au (arbitrary units), whilst at repression Ry the
probable amusement would be 0.6 x 0.4 = 0.24 au.
SErem9t4 of rep-ressLon
This roughly quantitative relation can in turn be shown graphi-
cally:
average amusement
at tendentious
comedic elements
(arbitrary units)
Fic.3 Strength of repression of drive related to
tendentious comedic element (arbitrary
units)
so that maximum amusement is achieved at moderate repression levels.
At low levels of repression little psychic energy is made available
for release through amused response, whilst at high levels of
repression the chances of release are low and the large amount of
release/amusement which may be effected has to be averaged against
the many instances where humorous release will simply not occur.
"Had he been a quantitative theorist, Freud might have pro-
posed the inverted U-shaped relationship of pleasure and
activation; as he was not, he simply maintained ... that
activation and pleasure were inversely related."51
Much of the literature and much of this central section is
concerned, in various ways, with validating or with picking holes in
the above inverted-U-curve idea, and what follows needs to be read
with this in mind. The whole of the section is concerned with
amusement as a response to various kinds of comedic stimuli, and
with the relation of such amusement to different forms/manif-
estations of anxiety, repression etc. The subdivision into subsec-
- 190 -
tions is to a large extent a product of how these notions have been
studied and written about.
a) Incongruity
We have seen (pp.68-70 above) how writers as disparate as
Bergson, Freud and Koestler have in their different ways identified
ambiguity, incongruity or conceptual incompatibility as central to
the comedic. Wilson also notes this, using the term 'cognitive
dissonance':
"Most theorists view the appreciation of humour as involving
the re-establishment of cognitive equilibrium."52
There are two kinds of question to be addressed. First, is
humour necessarily incongruous? Provided we broaden our understand-
ing of 'incongruous' to include 'cognitively dissonant', 'in two
different planes', 'in unaccustomed juxtaposition', 'based on a
discrepancy in energy-levels', it seems that many humour theorists
implicitly assume that some form of incongruity is common to most if
not all humour. 53 Research has been carried out on jokes which rely
on the juxtaposition of incongruous elements, but the results have
been inconclusive. Kenny, 54 for example, found, using tendentious
jokes, that self-reported amusement increased with predictability,
which would suggest an inverse relationship between degree of
amusement and level of incongruity. Godkewitsch, 55 using (relative-
ly) non-tendentious material, found that there was an inverse
relation between predictability and funniness. Wilson comments that
the greater tendentiousness of Kenny's jokes may have overdetermined
their predictability and masked response-variations in relation to
- 193. -
incongruity, and finds that in general there is a link between
funniness and incongruity:
"This correlation suggests that incongruity co-varies with a
determinant of amusement, or is itself a determinant."55
The question thus remains an open one.
The second question in relation to incongruity is: is incongru-
ity itself funny? When experimental subjects were asked to lift a
series of approximately equal weights and then found that the last
weight was much lighter or heavier than expected, it was found57
that the incongruous final weight almost always produced a laughter
response. Nerhardt
"... suggested that laughter has multiple meanings and func-
tions, arguing that laughter without amusement, or the stim-
ulus of incongruity, might reflect friendliness and bonhom-
mie."55
In further experiments on incongruity stimuli and funniness ratings
Nerhardt found that rated funniness did increase with the level of
incongruity, but that beyond a certain point increased incongruity
did not produce even higher funniness rating. This was supported by
Ertel," who seems to have found an absurdity/funniness relation
strikingly reminiscent of the inverted U-shaped curve of Fig.3
above.
average
reported
funniness
absurdity
Fig .4 Relation of reported funniness to
absurdity, based on Ertel's findings.
- 192 -
This is a potentially fascinating finding, particularly in conjunc-
tion with the suggested relation in Fig.3. We must, however, be
cautious:
"Overall, the evidence supports the notion that incongruity
is a sufficient cause for amusement ... Even if incongruity
is not a sufficient cause of amusement it is a strong deter-
minant ... In summary it can be stated that incongruity is
a determinant, perhaps a sufficient cause, of amusement. It
is not clear though whether incongruity and amusement relate
in a linear or curvilinear fashion..60
To return to Nerhardt's above comments on "laughter without
amusement", we might again remind ourselves that there are many
pleasures rooted in the psychoanalytic notions of difference,
recognition etc. which have a difficult relation to what we are
calling 'amusement' (cf. pp.72-73 above). These pleasures include
those of anticipation, and of predicting the punchline of a joke,
and a certain amount of work has been done on the effect of timing
in jokes on reported amusement.
"A timing pause might evoke an increment of amusement by
allowing the audience time to anticipate the subsequent
occurrence of humour ... Such anticipatory thought might
lessen, or even eliminate, the eventual incongruity of the
joke."61
The hypothesis would then be that increased timing-pause during the
joke-delivery and specifically before the punchline would reduce the
(perceived) incongruity of the joke. That Wilson's results are
inconclusive (his comments on the validity of his experiment are an
exemplary instance of scientific scepticism) 62 is hardly surprising
in view of the complexity of the situation, but a restatement of
this very complexity is itself illuminating. First there is the
problem of expressive factors other than timing-pause (voice,
inflection) which may affect amusement. Second, there is the
problem of measuring incongruity, and the separating of some 'objec-
- 193 -
tive' notion of incongruity from perceived incongruity. Thirdly and
most confusingly, how would the (simplified) above hypothesis be
affected by the suggested inverted U-shaped relation of Fig.3 above?
If very high incongruity-levels are not usually found amusing, would
a lowering of perceived incongruity by the use of a pause shift the
response back along the curve and increase the amusement/reported
funniness? Fourthly, and partly in answer to this last point, all
the above effects would arguably be overlaid by the inhibiting
effect of hypercathecting the mechanism by which psychic energy is
released from repression (cf. pg.102 above).
The final point is supported by empirical work on sexual and
aggressive jokes: Wilson himself found that:
"... appreciation of joke-form facilitated enjoxment of sex-
ual joke themes when timing pause was brief.6.5
and that increasing the timing pause increases awareness of the
(tendentious) content with a consequent interference with/rejection
of the pleasures of the joke-form. Gollob and Levine sought to see
if having to 'explain' a joke would reduce its effectiveness, and
though they found that
"In conclusion, although we realize that alternative explana-
tions may account for the data obtained in this investiga-
tion, our positive results increase our subjective confi-
dence in the heuristic and predictive usefulness of Freud's
hypotheses concerning distraction as an important factor in
the enjoyment of aggressive humour."64
the "alternative explanations" are extremely pertinent; Gollob and
Levine's subjects were first asked to record their amusement at
various jokes which were on a 'scale' ranging from highly aggressive
to mildly aggressive; ten days later they were asked to explain why
each joke was funny and to again record their amusement-level. The
observed inhibition, particularly of high-aggression humour, by
- 194-
having to explain the humour is here clearly complicated by the
effects of repetition, which may include the pleasure of recognition
and/or the reduction of pleasure due to familiarity.
b) Amusement and anxiety/repression/inhibition/suppression
At the heart of the research in this field we find a tangle of
theoretical and methodological complexity and a consequent variety
of results and conclusions. Most researchers have used a variety of
techniques, which means that each piece of research is attended by
its own peculiar methodological problems; generalisations should
therefore be very tentative. The research of Strickland, Dworkin
and Efran, Singer Gollob and Levine, and also of Spiegel, Rosenwald,
and Grizwok and Scode165 has been generally supportive of Freudian
models, as has, to some extent, that of O'Connell. The evidence of
Byrne, Doris and Fierman, Luborsky and Cattell, Young and Frye has
tended to cast doubt upon/problematise such models.
One way into this labyrinthine material is through the question
of whether anxiety and/or aggressivity are symptomatic of repression
or of lack of repression. The problem is that
"It is arguable whether admission of sexual and aggressive
impulses is symptomatic of an absence, or a moderate or low
level, of repression ... Freudians may argue, from a theo-
retical rather than an empirical base, that everyone
represses their instinctual nature to some degree."
and further that
"the problem of determining whether and to what extent indi-
viduals employ repression seems to make experimental testing
of Freud's theory extremely difficult. 66
Some researchers, notably Byrne and Murray, have tended to
operate with the assumption that overt/conscious aggressivity
indicates a lack of repression, so that when they observed a posi-
tive correlation between overt/conscious aggressivity and enjoyment
of aggressive humour, they either concluded that
"... humour preferences are independent of motivational
states." 67
or went further to propose a complete inversion of Freudian assump-
tions; Wilson writes of Epstein and Smith's research:
"Epstein and Smith failed to confirm the Freudian hypothesis,
but observed a significant relationship between insight and
amusement ... A simple and exciting interpretation of the
relationship between insight and humorous appreciation, the
converse of the Freudian notion, would be that the enjoyment
of humour is inversely related to repression ... There is
evidence that insight is inversely related to repression and
positively related to humorous appreciation - so it seems
reasonable to propose that amusement and repression are
inversely related. 68 (original emphasis)
It must be said that the situation is not made easier by the fact
that other researchers who have used the same kind of relatively
simplistic assumption about overt hostility/lack of repression have
obtained different results: Strickland for example carried out
substantially the same experiment as Byrne with quite different
results.69
A good corrective to the simplistic notions exemplified above
can begin with O'Connell:
"Theoretically a person could repress an impulse yet show
such impulse derivatives as hostile behaviour or apprecia-
tion of wit in his overt actions.""
His hypotheses are then based on the metahypothesis that
"within this theoretical framework, wit could be considered
as a tension-reducing mechanism, with appreciation of wit
contingent upon 'some' but not 'too much' tension or
.stress. 71
- 196 -
which is echoed by Rosenwald:
"... the operation of repression should increase amusement,
but only if the inhibition were readily liftable."72
and takes us back to Fig.2 (pg.189 above) and the graphical relation
of amusement to repression. Whilst the findings of, say, Epstein
and Smith may thus appear to be entirely anti-Freudian, they may not
be so much so if the repression levels involved were on the down-
slope of the curve; beyond a certain point, a particular joke or
comedic element may offer insufficient gratification to make the
momentary release from repression economically worthwhile.
Another problem with the notion of repression/hostility/
sexuality deployed by many of the researchers is that they have
created 'drive-arousal' situations in which the anxiety, aggressi-
vity or sexual arousal are artificially manipulated. We shall look
into some of these experiments below, but their relevance is likely
to be limited; we shall be more interested in finding ways to
measure existing attitudes (anxiety etc.) to specific subject-matter
such as the violent or the excremental, and the 'Blacky Tests' used
by Frankel and referred to both by O'Connell and by Young and Frye,
look exciting. (cf. pp.181-182 above). Her finding that
"... those subjects judged to be maladjusted did not appreci-
ate jokes reflecting the discovered problem area."73
previously observed by Herbert Barry (op cit), would be quite
consistent with the model being developed here wherein high levels
of repression in relation to anality, say, or other aspects of
sexuality, would be characterised by decreasing appreciation of
humour related to that field.
A number of researchers who have used 'drive arousal' techniques
have mobilized concepts of 'inhibition'. Though the term has not
generally been very precisely defined in the literature, it can
generally be seen as an externally manipulable variable co-extensive
with repression proper. It seems to be assumed that putting the
subject in an inhibiting situation exacerbates the effects of
repression, whilst removal of inhibitions is likely to weaken the
forces of repression. The work done by Singer, Gollob and Levine is
an illustration of this method and of the difficulties involved. The
supposition is made that
"... the presence of mild inhibitions may indeed be a neces-
sary precondition for the fullest enjoyment of aggressive
humour. Particularly strong inhibitions, on the other hand,
are likely to render the joke-facade ineffective and thereby
interfere with appreciation of aggressive humour."74
It was then found that 'inhibition' of aggressivity had the effect
of reducing enjoyment of hostile cartoons.
"That the inhibition subjects manifested lowered enjoyment of
aggressive cartoons but not nonsense cartoons indicated that
humour appreciation was a function of the fit between the
specific inhibitions (and/or affects) mobilized by the arou-
sal procedure and the cartoon content." 75 (original empha-
The obvious difficulties of quantifying inhibition in any such way
give rise to another problem. Given that an inverted U-shaped curve
has again been hypothesised, unless it is possible to measure the
level of inhibition with a degree of accuracy, it is possible to
point to a validation of the theory whether inhibition affects
amusement or not: the levels of inhibition or total resultant
repression could have been on either side of the peak of the curve
Furthermore, and even more seriously, there is an assumption in
Singer, Gollob and Levine's work (which tends to be shared by
others) that moral norms and injunctions inhibiting sadistic/
- 198 -
cruel/aggressive tendencies can be mobilized by showing the subjects
paintings depicting violent themes/events. It is at least question-
able whether inhibitions can be manipulated experimentally in so
facile a way.
Another factor which is likely to obscure any straightforward
relation between repression and amusement at tendentious humour is
the suppression based on social taboo, on norms of social behav-
iour/acceptability.
"... it is not surprising that experimenters have failed to
confirm the Freudian hypothesis relating amusement and
repression. Humorous appreciation achieved by relief from
repression would be confounded by, and compounded with, the
amusement consequent on relief from suppression."76
Though we may want to argue that social taboos and behaviour norms
are themselves linked to the economic nexus in a manner analogous to
the determination of different kinds of neuroses and repressions by
the familial structures consequent on a specific mode of socioeco-
nomic formation (pp.14-25 & 31-36 above), it is clear that attempts
to distinguish the effects of repression and of suppression are
destined to be exceedingly difficult. We may indeed be tempted to
fall back (not a very satisfactory position) on Freud's own asser-
tion that in the case of jokes enabling a lifting of social or
political obstacles,
"... however much these and analogous jokes of a tendentious
nature may satisfy us, they are not able to provoke much
laughter."
whereas
"... the removal of an internal obstacle may make an incompa-
rably higher contribution to the pleasure."77
Strickland's experiment (op.cit) was designed in part to examine
the relative contributions of repression- and suppression-related
releases to appreciation of different kinds of humour. He tends to
betray a rather crude understanding of 'repression' according to
which it is a matter of all-or-nothing;
"... if the S were truly repressing hostility and aggression
he would very likely respond negatively to aggression in
humour or actually "miss the point" of aggressive jokes."78
This seems to leave no room for variable measures of amusement as
representing various degrees of repression. Despite this, and the
consequent overvaluing of suppression, Strickland's suggestion for
future research shows greater insight:
"While the present results may be adequately explained more
economically in terms of suppression rather than of repres-
sion, repressed motivations may account for an individual's
consistent trend of humour preferences that operated in so-
called 'neutral' situation. Suppression, on the other hand,
may account for momentary short-term preferences that can be
super-imposed when specifically provoked. Thus a person
with a general inclination to favour jokes with a sexual
theme might prefer hostile wit if placed in a sufficiently
frustrating situation. Periodic testing over long-range
intervals might provide some evidence on this point."7
C) Drive Arousal 
We have noted one or two of the limitations associated with the
'drive arousal' techniques employed by many researchers; let us now
look briefly at the methods used and at some of the complex and
contradictory results which have been obtained.
Sexual drive arousal has included reading classical 'erotic'
passages, looking at classical 'erotic' paintings and looking at
photographs of models. Aggressive/hostile drive-arousal has
included reading texts, looking at paintings, and being subjected to
- 200 -
a variety of provocation/insult techniques Immediately evident is
the disparity between the various methods, which is likely to make
many comparisons/corroborations problematic if not impossible. Thus
for instance Singer at one point used some Goya paintings to sensit-
ize his subjects to representations of violence; Young and Frye
employed a programme of priming their subjects with insults. Though
this may have been very effective in making the subjects more
hostile, the consequences of the hostility may not have been what
the experimenters were looking to test:
"The insults may have distracted attention, or induced an
antagonism towards the experimenter that generalised to his
humour ... Perhaps Young and Frye were outstandingly tal-
ented at abuse."8u
According to Young and Frye their results showed that
"contrary to Freudian prediction there was no increased
appreciation of wit under insulting conditions ... The
results agree with Byrne (1958) and O'Connell (1960) in
showing that experimental attempts to affect appreciation of
specific kinds of humour by differential motivation arousal
are not successful."81
What this instance exemplifies is the confusion over what exactly
the consequences for repression are supposed to be when a particular
drive is 'aroused'. Does arousal of the drive lead to greater or
lesser repression? Do the Cleese/Chapman shouting sketches of the
TV Monty Python, Vivian of The Young Ones, and/or the Dangerous
Brothers of Saturday Live82 function to increase aggressivity in the
spectator? If so, what is the effect of repressed (in this case
perhaps rather suppressed) impulses? Such questions are particu-
larly beguiling in relation to Wilson's inverted U-shaped curve.
That the results of drive-arousal work also depend on the kind or
drive being studied is suggested most effectively by Strickland, who
administered the same humour test to an induced-hostility group, an
- 201 -
aroused-sexual-motivation group, and to a control group. Strick-
land's descriptions of the arousal procedures are worth reproducing
to give an idea of the kind of work with which we are dealing.
"In the first experimental condition, the experimenter (E)
attempted to arouse hostility and anger in the Ss (Hostile
group). When the S appeared at the appointed time, the E
conveyed through his tone of voice and small gestures his
displeasure at being interrupted. The S was then ushered
curtly into an adjoining room and told that the E would be
with him "in just a minute". The room itself was windowless
and completely bare except for straight chair and table. The
door was then slammed shut and the S was left alone for
nearly 20 minutes. At the end of this period the E re-
entered the room and without apology or explanation adminis-
tered the humour test.
The second condition (Sexual group) attempted to arouse
sexual motivation following an approach suggested by Clark.
When the S was introduced into the experimental situation he
was presented with 10 8x10 photographs of nude photogra-
pher's models. He was told that the pictures had been rated
by arts students on their artistic qualities and that we
were trying to determine the relationship between art and
sex; it was then his job to rate the pictures solely on
their sexual attractiveness. He was asked to rank the 10
photographs in order of his preference and then in a para-
graph to describe what he particularly liked about his first
choice. When this task was completed, the S was given the
humour test.
In the third condition (Control group) the S was given
the humour test immediately after being brought into the
experimental situation."83
His specific hypothesis was that
"... a person who is annoyed and frustrated but is prevented
from expressing his hostility should respond more favourably
to humorous material of a hostile nature. 84
His results indicated that the hostile situation increased the
appreciation of hostile humour but interfered with the appreciation
of other kinds of humour. He also found that the sexual arousal
tended to increase the appreciation of sexual humour without 
interfering with the appreciation of other forms of humour. These
are interesting findings, but we are then immediately back with the
problem of whether the arousal in each separate case corresponds to
- 202 -
an increase or a decrease in total repression. From Strickland's
descriptions of the experimental procedures, it certainly appears
that the hostility-inducing technique would have increased tension
and discouraged any release of repressed energy, but it is not at
all clear how the sexual motivation would affect inhibition or
repression of sex-related repressed energy. To be fair, Strickland
himself is quite circumspect about this.
Some others, including Young and Frye, and Byrne, carried out
similar experiments, but with different results. Young and Frye
come to frankly anti-Freudian conclusions (cf. pg.201 above) and
Byrne finds that
"... for the hostile, sex and nonsense cartoons, motivation
arousal did not exert a significant influence on cartoon
ratings. ,,85
though his citing of O'Connell as also offering "uniformly negative
results" seems rather cheeky.
Byrne himself offers two pertinent differences between his own
study and Strickland's. He seems in his concluding remarks to
concede that the (usual) practice of rating each cartoon/joke/
comedic element independently is preferable to his own method, by
which
"... a given category could not be rated more amusing without
causing a corresponding decrease in the rating of another
category. 86
which must have imposed some odd constraints on the kinds of results
possible/ The other difference briefly discussed by Byrne can be
observed among many other pieces of research: while Strickland's
administration of cartoons was individual, Byrne's was carried out
on a group basis. In view of the fact that it is scarcely going to
- 203 -
be possible, in our own research, to carry out work on an entirely
individual basis, the effects of the group on response to the
comedic are going to be very relevant. Evidence as to the nature
and predictability of group influence has been sparse; the influence
no doubt also depends on the type of humour, and also on the way the
influence is being detected. We have already noted (pg.174 above)
Young and Frye's contention that private self-report is unaffected
by a group context whereas the laughter response is facilitated by
such a context.
We have also already noted O'Connell's refusal of the common
postulation that there exists
".. an inverse relationship between repression and overt
behaviour but a direct relationship between repression and
appreciation of wit. Thus, the person who 'represses' hos-
tility should not act in an overtly hostile manner, but
should enjoy hostile wit."87
His attempts to measure adjustment/stress were more subtle than is
usual, the large groups notwithstanding (he used 332 subjects in
all), and his stress-inducing technique also appears sound:
"For the two stress classes, a faculty member accompanied the
E on the second day and became the instigator of both failu-
re-stress and insult techniques. He introduced himself as a
professor of clinical psychology who was shocked and
appalled at the attitude of the class in taking the SAI the
previous class period. The results of the test, he said,
pointed out that the members were either lying about them-
selves or were grossly maladjusted. He also stated that
since the tests reflected a marked lack of adjustment, the
majority of the class should give serious consideration
either to leaving college or to changing their majors. After
reiterating the threats and insults a few times, the insti-
gator informed the students that they would be given one
more test, and that they should display some maturity in
taking it, rather than performing like high school freshmen.
They were also admonished against communicating with their
neighbours in any way. The E distributed the WHAT immedi-
ately upon the conclusion of the instigator's remarks."88
The danger of students taking out their frustration on the WHAT
- 204 -
exercise is incidentally reduced by the use of a person other than
the experimenter to deliver the insults
O'Connell's first hypothesis, that exposure to stress would
increase the appreciation of wit, was not confirmed, but he is less
sure about the significance of this finding than Byrne, or Young and
Frye for example. Results confirmed that men tend to prefer hostile
wit, women tend to appreciate nonsense wit more. O'Connell also
found that 'maladjusted' 89 persons enjoyed hostile wit more, except
under stressful condition, when they appreciated it less than
'well-adjusted' subjects. He confirmed that 'well-adjusted' sub-
jects more frequently preferred 'humour' to 'wit':
"In contrast to his attitude toward wit, Freud always
extolled the humorist as disdaining the use of excessive
repressions, and he depicted humour as the most adaptive
nonpathological defence."9
In a small way, the most interesting finding is the lack of conclu-
sive evidence for O'Connell's fifth and last hypothesis, that
'well-adjusted' subjects should appreciate nonsense wit more than
'maladjusted' ones: he found that gender-differences here were far
more significant than S-I scores. Had his final hypothesis as well
as his third been confirmed, it would have 'shown' that women are
better-adjusted than men. 91 In fact O'Connell himself calls into
question the validity of the S-I scores as indicators of 'adjust-
ment':
"According to the Y-phenomenon (Rogers 1954) a small discre-
pancy between self and ideal scores could signify either a
fairly successful adjustment or a highly defensive malad-
justment."92
and calls for further research. His own discussion section is
illuminating:
"These results are congruent with psychoanalytic theory,
according to which the maladjusted person represses hostil-
ity, but can make use of the verbal distortions of Hostile
Wit for partial release so long as the objective situation
is not too stressful. ... Certain researchers were ready
to discount Freudian theory because of a positive relation
noted between appreciation of wit and hostile behaviours
(Byrne, 1956 Luborsky and Cattell 1947). In these studies,
the key variables of adjustment and stress were not meas-
ured, and it was erroneously implied that psychoanalytic
theory considers that the neurotic is not hostile (e.g.
inverse relationship between repression and overt behav-
iour). In this study it was found that maladjusted people,
as defined by their self-ideal discrepancy scores, enjoy
hostile wit under non-stressful conditions."93
The subsequent study of Earl Dworkin and Jay Efran (op.cit, cf.
pg.177 above) is critical of the design of most previous experiments
(including those of O'Connell), citing the work of Singer as the
most thorough. In particular, they point out that previous studies
had not used any independent index of arousal, and that it could
therefore not be ascertained whether a particular effect was in fact
due to arousal since there was no evidence that arousal had been
effective Dworkin and Efran's use of a modified form of the
Nowlis-Green MACL certainly seems to constitute an adequate measure
of anxiety and hostility arousal.
Their Hypotheses94 are concerned with the differential apprecia-
tions of different kinds of (oral, taped) humorous monologues by
angered and non-angered groups of subjects, and with the effect of
hostile/non-hostile humour on reported anger/hostility.
d) Reduction of hostility
Dworkin and Efran's use of drive-arousal techniques prompts us
to note again the distinction to be made between such induced
- 206 -
hostility, 'pathological' hostility, and hostility due to an every-
day/accidental exposure to objectionable (comedic) situations. It
is the last of these which is of most relevance to us, yet little
work appears to have been done here.
The definition of the role of the comedic in 'pathological'
hostility is, of course, a dubious enterprise at the best of times;
we can note, with O'Connell, that
"Wit has been regarded as a means of indirect expression for
latent hostile urges. Freud was never certain whether this
mechanism was essentially pathological or adaptive. Early
in his thinking he correlated the appreciation of hostile
wit with psychoneurotic symptoms (1905), but in later years
(1921) he included it among normal adaptive mechanisms."95
When Byrne96 found that those subjects who expressed hostility found
hostile cartoons funnier than those subjects who did not express
their hostility, he was working with hospital patients whose 'types'
he felt able to categorise. That he was unable to replicate this
finding in his own later work was probably due less to any fundamen-
tal difference between those inside psychiatric hospitals and those
outside than to the distinctions between induced and 'found' hostil-
Still, as we have begun to see, the results with regard to
induced hostility are far from uniform. Dworkin and Efran found
that anger arousal led to a greater preference for hostile humour
and that exposure to (any) humour seemed to decrease reported
feelings of anger and anxiety. Interestingly, though, they could
not establish a link between appreciation of humour and its anger-
reducing property. Singer, Gollob and Levine sought to increase
aggression-inhibition in their subjects, then observed that the
- 207 -
increased inhibition lowered appreciation of aggressive humour (cf.
pg.198 above).
Singer independently found that aggression arousal did not
significantly affect humour appreciation. However, he also repli-
cated Dworkin and Efran's non-correlation of tension-reduction and
appreciation, finding that hostile humour was particularly aggres-
sion-reducing for highly aroused subjects but that
"... posthumour aggression and tension levels were unrelated
to humour appreciation."97
As Wilson puts it,
"Although the humour dampened tension and aggression, this
pacification did not seem to be mediated by the enjoyment of
the humour ... Perhaps a juggler, or a performing seal,
might have been equally effective. 98
returning us abruptly to the base-line of pleasure.
e) Amusement and Sexual content
"There is a pervasive view that humour is anarchic and sub-
versive ... Jokes are fiercely conservative, and undoubt-
ably (sic) gain in their effectiveness by concealing their
true political colours by masquerading as subversives."99
This is particularly true of sexual humour, though recent
developments of parodic/pastiche and alienating forms of humour,
which exhibit a reappropriation of Brechtian methods in the service
of a kind of sexism-aversion-therapy, must call into question
Wilson's term "true political colours". Apparently-oppositional
comedy may be conservative in the sense that it enables the working-
off of energy which could otherwise be available for action, for
real political work. There is arguably a long history of "laughing
it off", of comedy as safety-valve, or 'coping mechanisms' ("you've
- 208 -
got to laugh haven't you") identified by Wilson in the following
terms:
"When a bewildering event occurs posing weighty mental prob-
lems, by evading simply rational explanation, the audience
may resolve incongruity by treating it as funny, as reflect-
ing artificial or perverse determinism."100
Still, pleasure can surely also be liberatory, can be used to combat
the forces of oppression. Though it would appear that pleasure has
been substantially colonized by conservatism and inertia, it should
also constitute a category around which radicality can mobilize.101
Social humour is one thing.
The work done by jokes on an unconscious/individual level is
another matter; here the conservatism is much more insidious,
residing as it does in the metastructure itself as well as in the
exposure to (most likely) dominant-ideological representations in
the jokes' overt subject-matter. The dispersal of small amounts of
psychic energy via the joke-work enables repressions to remain at
'comfortable' levels instead of building to levels where destructive
("anti-social"?) consequences may result.
Most experiments on sexual-content of jokes therefore have the
air of scratching the surface of a lake. In one of his own exper-
iments, Wilson sought to present puns "with or without sexual
content". Whilst this does recognize that there is a kind of
ground-mechanism for puns, 102 the notion of adding a 'sex-
ingredient' to a neutral pun appears suspect:
"A constant set of puns were presented with or without sexual
content and at various levels of timing and initial incon-
gruity. .103
Wilson found that sexual content increased appreciation, and that
- 209 -
appreciation was also dependent on incongruity. Increased timing
boosted awareness of sexual content and reduced appreciation of the
low-incongruity jokes. There was a significant negative correlation
between perceived sexual content and reported funniness (cf. pp.193-
194 above). These results are, on the whole, consistent with
Freudian expectations, but Wilson himself places his findings in
context:
"I would not expect amusement to be highly correlated with
awareness of sexual content if amusement depended on addi-
tional factors which varied independently of this awareness
- as indeed it does ... I would also expect the individual's
level of sexual inhibition, sexual drive, arousal ... to
influence amusement. p104
He also notes that
"Subjects may have had similar perceptions of the sexual con-
tent of jokes but differed in respect of other factors that
mediated amusement. 105
One such factor has been studied by Doris and Fierman. They
found that the gender of the experimenter/interviewer compared with
the subject was potentially critical to the subject's response.
High-anxiety subjects consistently appreciated all kinds of cartoons
less in the company of an experimenter of the opposite gender than
did low-anxiety subjects. In the company of a same-gender experi-
menter there seemed to be little difference between the responses of
high-anxiety and low-anxiety subjects for any cartoon category.
Doris and Fierman were at this point using both E-observed Mirth-
responses (6-point scale) and self-reported appreciation scores, and
found that the high-anxiety subjects' devaluation of the cartoons
when faced with opposite-gender experimenters was reflected much
less in the E-observed scores than in the self-reported preferences.
This can be seen as another piece of evidence in favour of self-
- 210 -
report as being more 'authentic', but it also raises relevant
question about the positions occupied by 'male' and 'female' sub-
jects in relation to Freud's paradigmatic joke-structure, indeed to
language, the look and all forms of representation. Differential
positionings in symbolisation will have to be borne in mind in
interpreting any audience research done for this thesis. In a
nutshell, " The social context appears to be crucial."1"
A limited amount of research appears to have been done on female
and male responses to sexual humour, and Wilson observes that most
research comparing the two had found that men showed greater appre-
ciation than women of this kind of humour. 1" He carried out
experiments of his own and found out that the (ipsative) scores for
appreciation of both innocent and sexual humour were not signifi-
cantly different for men and for women. He makes an interesting and
telling point about the nature of the humour presented to the
subjects:
"The studies showing less amusement of sexual humour among
women employed chauvinist, professional wit - produced
mainly be men for masculine amusement. In this experiment,
the humour was probably more egalitarian and appealing to
feminine taste in attributing sexual appetite and initiative
to women as well as to men."--8
Let us not, however, ignore Doris and Fierman's above social-context
maxim. We shall see later how Wilson's findings in this experiment
are fatally flawed/
A major omission in most of the work done on responses to sexual
humour has been any attention to the type of 'sexual' content.
Wilson's own reference to Gershon Legman as one of his sources 109 of
sexual jokes is rather absurd in view of Legman's own systematic
- 211 -
voyeurism
innuendo
exhibitionism
general ribaldry
J	 A*
study of different kinds of sexual jokes and the way they are
related to different kinds of repressed anxieties about childbirth,
anality, castration etc. Though his work makes no claims to empiri-
cal status, his erudite insights and psychoanalytically knowledge-
able speculation are nevertheless of value.
For Wilson the 'form' of the sexual humour is more important,
and he outlines his model in a chapter entitled 'The Functions of
Filth'. He develops a heuristic typology consisting of four catego-
ries; if the 'joker' is J and the 'audience' is A and the object of
the humour is marked by * then the four mechanisms are as fol-
lows:110
Though Wilson does note that sexual advance/innuendo ("smut") is
more acceptable if framed in a jocular mode (a clear parallel to
Freud's paradigm for the joke-structure), his model only partly
intersects with Freud's; despite the letter J, the categories
clearly encompass forms of humour other than jokes. In contrast to
the generally more 'private' nature of voyeuristic and innuendo
humour,
"General ribaldry and exhibitionism appear in the academic
literature as the forte of professional humourists."111
Commenting on the history of 'fool's licence', Saturnalia, ritualis-
tic misrule etc. ,112 Wilson also observes that
"Professional sexual humour in industrial societies consists
largely in general ribaldry, whereas in pre-industrial
societies it is generally exhibitionism. p113
- 212 -
The 'general ribaldry' category does have a catch-all feel to it,
and the examples given could easily be seen to 'contain' elements of
the other three types, yet even as a composite term it has at least
some descriptive strength.
There is a further reference to 'industrialized societies' in
Wilson's concluding section, which is entitled 'The Cryptic Conser-
vative':
"In industrialized societies the professional comic is a
social success, so deviancy on his part would offer a sub-
versive example. Strong legal restrictions of obscenity
law, then, have a defensively conservative effect in ensur-
ing that the comic does not offer a deviant model of suc-
.cess. 114
Wilson at one point outlines Lenny Bruce's arrest and prosecution
for public use of a 'private' work ("fuck"); he observes that in
finding him guilty of obscenity the court correctly identified
Bruce's subversiveness in relation to the sexual reticence usually
effected by the suppressive work of guilt and shame. Bruce per-
formed in Britain in 1962 and was subsequently refused entry as an
'undesirable alien', but his continuing status and reputation in a
veritable 'alternative culture' to some extent expose an apparently
naive use of 'success' and 'ensure' in Wilson's formulation. Those
who turn their backs on success as conventionally defined are likely
to view the brushes with the law as a positive recommendation.
Monty Python courted court action with much of their earlier
published and record material, but usually took legal advice to
avoid actually getting into trouble. Specific sketches from some of
their TV episodes also came close to getting them into trouble:115
the Undertakers sketch of 22nd December 1970 and 'Salad Days' of
- 213 -
30th November 1972 are good examples. 116 Monty Python's Life of 
Brian and The Meaning of Life have had their share of legal
difficulties and moralistic opprobrium. Nevertheless the Monty
Python team appear to have emerged with an alarming air of respect-
ability - this is perhaps not surprising. Also not surprising is
the reference to Spike Milligan 'hosting' Saturday Live on 29th
March 1986 as being 'The Establishment'. What needs to be looked at
(and this is another way of saying what this work is largely about)
is whether, and if so how, the kind of excremental, aggressive and
absurd humour produced by the Monty Python team, sometimes in the
teeth of various forces of censorship and disapproval, can suggest
"a deviant model of success".
It is time to return from this digression to our review of
empirical work on the subject.
f) Amusement, derision and aggressivitv
Most of the literature on derisive humour has been concerned
with direct derision of one person by another, and with the func-
tions which this fulfils for each party. Various forms of 'superi-
ority theory' from Aristotle and Plato to Hobbes, Bain and Bergson
have been taken up and incorporated into models elaborated by Freud,
Kris, Ludovici, Zigler, Grotjahn and many others. The possible
functions of such humour for the receiver or butt have been dis-
cussed by Klapp, Makarius, Welsford and Goffman among others.
Radcliffe-Brown117 has described how in many cultures (and arguably
in a number of situations in our own type of culture) mock-insults
and derisive humour form part of 'joking relationships' within which
- 214 -
potential tension and aggressivity can be worked off in a socially
acceptable way. Related to this is what Wilson calls 'wit's
licence', which gives rise to
"affectionate abuse ... extreme insults too extreme or inac-
curate to be ... sincere abuse."118
Another kind of relation which the butt can have to derisive
humour involves a degree of misrecognition of its purpose. Wilson
refers to La Fave's findings:
"The butt may feign amusement while nurturing grievance, or
may be genuinely amused while failing to see that he is the
target of the joke ... The butt may be amused by the incon-
gruous, rather than self-disparaging aspects of the
joke."119
References to the social/political functions of derisive humour
are harder to find in the literature. Here, though, is one colour-
ful example:
"Joking is essentially conservative, and ridicule shows an
unattractive face of conservatism, funnelling malice and
abuse downwards through the social pyramid. People ridicule
deviants, subordinates, those with mental or physical abnor-
malities, members of minority- and out-groups. And within
the privacy of their racial minorities, the middle-class
deride and scapegoat the lower strata. Those with the least
status, at the base of the pyramid, seemed oppressed by a
cumulative burden of abuse. From the worm's eye view,
humour must seem a particularly malicious and inequitable
form of expression and not an amusing matter. True, the
worm does snigger at those above the ground in the daylight
of social prestige and power. Yet as universal scapegoat
and oil-rag for the social machine he receives far more
abuse than he can ever return."120
Seductive at first, this passage, on second reading, does not ring
true, and indeed appears to be a somewhat patronizing assessment of
minority and/or working-class consciousness. The "oil-rags" may
derive a great deal of pleasure from deriding those in power, and
who is to say that the pleasure is entirely of a conservative
- 215 -
nature? (cf. discussion of 'Conflict function' pp.91-92 above) The
confusion between humour and abuse which runs through the passage is
also significant because there is a lot of pleasure to be gained
from the use of abuse, with or without humour
Wilson devotes a substantial chapter to the functions of deri-
sive humour in various contexts, 121 first dividing the genre into
four 'mechanisms':
Alridicule	 (or J ( 
private ridicule	 J 	
shared ridicule	 J* ----> A*
self-ridicule	 J*--4A	 (cf. also pg. 212 above)
Though he makes some interesting observations along the way, his use
of his own typology is not very clear. I have included it only to
point out what is missing from it, namely the spectacle of two third
parties in an abuse situation; this could be shown diagrammatically
thus:
Empirical work has been done by Gutman and Priest 122 on
appreciation of jokes featuring aggression by one character towards
another. They constructed 'squelch' jokes and tried to manipulate
the perceived 'goodness' and 'badness' of the protagonists by making
their behaviour/characteristics in the run-up to the joke either
'socially acceptable' or 'socially unacceptable'. Leaving aside the
question of whether these latter terms would have meant the same
thing to all the subjects (though pre-tests were in fact carried
- 216 -
out), Gutman and Priest than had four jokes exemplifying the permu-
tations good/bad aggressor, good/bad victim. 123 Their hypotheses
were that a 'good' person's hostile act would be seen as less
hostile and more humorous, and that a 'deserving' victim of hostil-
ity would elicit a greater appreciation of the humour than an
'undeserving' victim. Their subjects were asked to assess humorous-
ness, the hostility of the punchline, the social acceptability of
the aggressor and of the victim, and the justifiability of the
aggression.
Both hypotheses were seen to be confirmed. More precisely,
their results indicated that
"... the perceived character of the victim is the major
determinant of the justifiability of aggression; aggression
towards a socially unacceptable victim is significantly more
justified than aggression towards a socially acceptable vic-
tim ... Subjects saw humorous aggression as positively jus-
tified only when the victim deserved his fate and his
squelcher was a good person." 124 (original emphasis)
and they go on to make the assertion that
"... the present research shows that identification with a
victim of aggression is less related to humour than is iden-
tification with the source of aggression."125
Their findings with respect to appreciation of humour were perhaps
less conclusive. Wilson notes that they
"... observed that amusement decreased with perceived inten-
sity of humorous aggression."126
and that
"Seemingly the audience were prepared to enjoy aggressive
jokes regardless of the moral or social acceptability of the
humour. 127
Wilson also comments that the appreciation of the humour of aggres-
sion was found by Manne11 125 to depend on whether the 'punishment'
of the victim is 'realistic', or set in a more 'fantastic' setting
- 217 -
where moral questions are not encouraged. With Monty Python we are
clearly dealing with a non-realist setting in which any desire for
'justifiability' for aggressivity is likely to be suspended. We
shall return to one or two aspects of Gutman and Priest's work in
the 'Problems' subsection below.
Though more work clearly needs to be done in this field, the
relation which the receiver of the joke enjoys with aggressor and
victim respectively is particularly important. It is presumably
possible for the reading/viewing subject to identify either with the
aggressor or with the victim (or indeed with both to different
degrees). Gutman and Priest claim (surely surprisingly) that other
research
"... has shown that it is difficult for people to identify
with the victim of aggression, even when innocent."129
and express surprise at the extent of qualified sympathy for the
victim indicated by their subjects through the 'justifiability of
aggression' scores.
The preferential identification with aggressor or victim may of
course be due to some individual/psychological propensity: siding
with the underdog has its own self-virtuous gratifications It also
surely has much to do with the perceived characteristics of the
protagonists, and indeed Gutman and Priest tried to give half their
victims 'social acceptability'. The question that this label begs,
of course, is precisely how the unacceptability is constructed:
differential identifications with protagonists, aggressor or victim,
must be based on much more subtle comparisons with ideal images etc.
One alternative to - or rather variation on - the usual Freudian
- 218 -
notion of identification is described by Wilson: it is Wolff's
appropriation of William James' concept of the 'larger self', which
would consist of
"... all possessions in the widest sense of the term -includ-
ing the body, mind, spouse, children, bank account, reputa-
tion, domestic pets, friends, relatives, interests  .130
as well as ethnic group, gender, class ... All such categories
would than be 'affiliated objects'. In a way this is quite consis-
tent with the Freudian operations in identification of sublimation
and transference, and alerts us to the many ways in which subjects
might identify with aggressor or victim, socially acceptable or not.
Wilson at one point refers to Zillman and Cantor's 'explicit state-
ment of previously unstated assumptions':
"Affinity or antagonism towards the butt ... may be quanti-
fied, ... the evaluation of the butt may vary with time and
context ... the evaluation may be determined by empathetic
factors that can be independent of membership of reference
groups..131
Wilson himself seems to favour the tendency to identify with the
victim/aggressed; in his tabulation, 132 A is a member of the
audience and A* is the victim of aggression:
Reaction to
content
criticizing A*
Reaction to
joke 'form'
Net reaction
to joke
If A likes A* Displeasure Pleasure Slight displeasure,
indifference, or
slight pleasure
If A is
indifferent
to A*
Indifference Pleasure Moderate
pleasure
If A dislikes A* Pleasure Pleasure Extreme
pleasure
Fig.5 Audience's reactions to the form and content of derisive
'okes
Though clearly an oversimplification, this model does help account
for all those times when the object of a joke (political figure or
group, ethnic group, any other person or situation which has affec-
tive resonance) is an 'affiliated object' and the joke is
consequently not very funny.
We have used a little space to look at possible subject rela-
tions to perceived derisive/abusive humour between third parties
because a prominent feature running through the Monty Python TV
series (perhaps less so in the subsequent films) was the series of
sketches written mostly by John Cleese and Graham Chapman about
often exceedingly aggressive/abusive characters. Here the abuse is
clearly a spectacle, and pleasures derived from empathy with the
screen personages are clearly compounded by pleasures of recogni-
tion, of performance, of language, of excess. We are not necessar-
ily any longer in the realm of jokes, or even of humour. Gutman and
Priest's question is
"Under what circumstances, if ever, do people enjoy unjusti-
fied aggression disguised as humour?"1J3
4.3 Problems
A number of methodological problems have been thrown up by the
research reviewed, and some have been mentioned, in passing, above.
This is a good point at which to bring them all together.
The difficulties seem to fall into three groups, the first of
which I do not propose to discuss: this is the problem of making
sense of the statistical operations and jargon used by a number of
- 220 -
the researchers. Obviously a degree of statistical rigour is
essential and this may be another matter to consider in designing an
empirical audience-response study. The other problems tend either
to relate to specific experiments or variables, or are of a more
general meta-methodological nature. There is bound to be some
overlap here
a) Problems more specific to particular experiments or vari-
ables.
We have already noted that terms such as 'humour', 'joke' etc.
have generally been rather vaguely employed by most writers studied.
Singer, Gollob and Levine, Byrne, Strickland, and Doris ad Fierman
all used cartoons in the study of 'humour', Dworkin and Efran's work
on 'humour' clearly employed various kinds of 'jokes', as did that
of Gollob and Levine. Gutman and Priest were more consistent in
their explicit use of 'jokes'. Of those writers consulted, only
O'Connell seeks to draw a working distinction between 'wit' and
'humour'. Nevertheless, though he observes that
"Occasionally, humour has been mentioned by psychoanalyti-
cally oriented investigators but its connotations have been
confused with those of wit, which has been somewhat more
frequently studied ..."134
his own distinction appears somewhat idiosyncratic. All the comedic
instances studied were jokes, and these were then subdivided into
three categories: humour, hostile wit and nonsense wit. Although
some care was taken over these definitions, and
"to avoid idiosyncratic definitions of these concepts, each
judge was provided with a resume of Freud's ideas concerning
wit and humour."135
the use of humour as a subcategory of the joke seems simply wrong.
- 221 -
As has been seen before (cf. pp.62-65 & footnotes), Freud's own use
of the term 'humour' was ambiguous, but a kind of joke it never was
A possible (but only partial) explanation of O'Connell's usage would
be a different translation of the German 'Witz' from that generally
favoured; while the most suitable English translation of Freud's use
of 'Witz' is usually taken to be 'joke', O'Connell may be translat-
ing it as 'wit' and then placing 'humour' as a parallel category.
But then what does he mean by 'joke'? ...
A further problem raised by O'Connell's method of categorising
his jokes but common to much of the other research, is the use of
'judges', who are frequently experts in the field. Why should a
group of clinical psychologists be most suitable for the task of
pre-selecting the material to be used? What assumptions about
'objectivity' and the status of scientific discourse are being made
here?
A major problem raised by a number of the studies is that of
selection of subjects and the representativeness of the results.
Byrne and Strickland both used university psychology students as
subjects, and most other research has used either undergraduate
university or college students. There are, or course, good economic
and institutional reasons for this, but most of the researchers tend
to treat the consequent limits on replicability of their results
with more or less cavalier disregard. It is generally thought
sufficient to assume the student subject groups to be 'homogeneous';
very little attention is paid to the psycho-social background of the
students, beyond (sometimes) noting age, gender, native language.
One of the few comments recognizing the strictly limited validity of
the results comes from O'Connell:
"To what degree one can generalize beyond the youth of the
middle class to different ages and classes is a problem for
future research. p136
Most studies have also been content to include equal numbers of
male and female subjects and to leave it at that, though Doris and
Fierman (cf. pg.211 above) did note some gender-specific findings
and Gollob and Levine's work was with a group of female subjects.
O'Connell's work, with its gender-specific hypotheses, again stands
out in this respect (cf. also pp.204-207 above);
"Hostile wit appears to be a predominantly male reaction, and
in everyday situations it is the more maladjusted male who
is disposed to use it ... Perhaps if our culture frowns
upon hostile wit for women, only certain types of women rely
upon this mechanism for tension reduction."137
Wilson's experiment on differential male/female appreciations of
sexual humour (cf.pg .211 above) nicely demonstrates the way the
subjects' specific orientations can sabotage a worthy enterprise.
Wilson is here commendably dismissive of his own findings:
"In addition, the experiment used subjects who were grossly
unrepresentative of mankind and womankind. When the exper-
iment was conducted in 1973, students at the L.S.E. tended
to espouse a fierce egalitarianism, reject traditional sex
roles and pretend an ignorance of gender to avoid making
offensive distinctions between men and women. It would be a
mistake to generalize from the results of this experiment
about the resemblance of the sexes." 138
This reference enables us to note again the general lack of
attention in the literature to type of sexual content in jokes or
humour: Strickland and Young and Frye are particularly clear
examples. The rationale is provided by Wilson, who in his own
experiments used dirty jokes in sexual and 'clean' versions(1):
- 223 -
"The sexual versions of the jokes were selected from Legman's
'Rationale of the Dirty Joke' to satisfy two criteria. The
jokes were chosen for their reliance on verbal ambiguity,
and for the structural independence of their form and con-
tent. This independence meant that the joke ambiguity might
be expressed with or without sexual content, since neither
of the double-meanings were sexual. The content variable
was manipulated by leaving the dirty jokes intact, or denud-
ing them of their sexual content. The sexual versions of
the jokes expressed themes of exhibitionism, permissiveness,
sexual exploitation by men and by women, impotence and
rape. .139
The argument is then that
"Factor-analytic studies suggest that the presence of sexual
content in humour contributes to only one or two factors in
amusement ... Apparently, there are no multiple sources of
amusement that correspond to and reflect the immense varia-
tion and scope of sexual jokes. Consequently, no attempt
was made in this experiment to control, or systematically
vary, the nature of sexual themes. The sexual versions of
the experimental jokes were regarded as being inter-
changeably representative of the community of dirty
jokes. 14u
Perhaps the factor-analytic studies missed something.
The accounts given by researchers rarely give many examples of
jokes/humour used, but the question of sexism and patriarchal
definitions about what is funny about sex signifies through its
almost ubiquitous absence. Some insight into the sexual-political
assumptions underlying the sexual (and other) humorous material can
be gained from a few of the descriptions of sexual drive-arousal:
Byrne used 'sexual' passages from books such as Ulysses, Aphrodite,
God's Little Acre; Singer used Goya paintings; Strickland's use of
photographs of nude models was a naked demonstrations of heteroer-
otic cultural assumptions about sexuality. Apart from the assump-
tion of heterosexual orientation, the study is marked by the absence
of any reference to the gender of the subjects excepts for the
persistence of the word 'his'.
b) Problems of a more general methodological kind
Many of the papers studied begin with a preamble which briefly
sets out the theoretical framework which informs the work and states
some assumptions and hence hypotheses which are to be tested. The
danger which I suspect most of the studies do not really engage with
is that in an attempt to gain evidence for a hypothesis, to validate
an assumption, an experiment is designed (unconsciously) in such a
way as to encourage confirmation of the hypothesis: you find what
you are looking for. It may be that in sciences such as physics and
chemistry experiments can be constructed which to all practical
intents and purposes at least dispense with this objection. In
experiments whose very object of study is individual and/or social
human behaviour it must be extremely difficult to guard against this
kind of 'experimental effect'.
A closely related problem in sociological research is how to
control the experimental environment (but then if it is 'con-
trolled', what is its relation to 'reality'?) so as to reduce the
number of variables, and then how to control and observe those
variables. How sure can we be in any particular experiment that
other factors are not responsible for (changes in) humour apprecia-
tion or anxiety scores which are unaccounted for? In fairness, most
researchers point out this problem, but the design of the majority
of the experiments does not seem over-rigorous. Thus Gutman and
Priest's jokes seek to vary the combinations of good/bad aggressor
and good/bad victim, but there are surely so many other differences
between the jokes, so many uncontrolled variables, as to make the
correlation of enjoyment with goodness/badness or aggressor/victim
- 225 -
quite unsound. For example the joke involving 'bad aggressor' and
'bad victim' constructs both protagonists as 'bad' by having them
behave loudly in a busy restaurant. One of them asks "What do I
have to do to get a glass of water around here?" and the other
replies "Why don't you try setting yourself on fire?" 141 Among
other things this can be read as a ritual insult between friends.
But is it an instance of 'aggressive humour'? Is it a 'squelch
joke'?
This leads directly to another difficult matter, that is the
culture-specificity of what can be defined as "hostile", "sexy" etc.
The conventions which determine what kinds of representations of
hostility and violence, say, are acceptable in literature, radio and
TV and in films (and in empirical audience studies) are culturally
and historically variable. We have already noted the culturally
relative relevance (pp.216-219 above) of Gutman and Priest's notion
of 'social acceptability'. Other examples are Gollob and Levine's
(acknowledged - op.cit) use of a high proportion of husband-wife
cartoons in their 'aggression' categories 142 and Dworkin and Efran's
use of recorded comedy acts such as Woody Allen, Bob Newhart, Bill
Cosby as instances of 'hostile humour'. I am not familiar with the
hostile end of these performers' material, but many of today's
audiences would probably find it rather tame. There is thus consid-
erable need for care in constantly reconstructing the categories of
aggressivity and sexuality in humour, and also in assessing the
forms of humour which can fruitfully be studied with particular
audiences. In our study of Monty Python's Meaning of Life, it may
be worth considering including a more 'extreme' example, say, of
excremental humour 143 as a 'limit case' in order to provoke some
more marginal responses.
Another context-specific factor is the clarity/comprehensibility
of jokes/comedic elements used. In principle a certain cultural
capital is always required in order to decode any communicative
artefact, but it is clear that in studies such as those we have been
looking at the assumption is made that the 'understanding' of the
joke, cartoon or humour corresponds 144 to the predicted reading; the
possibility of 'deviant' readings is assumed to be negligible; the
use of 'judges' in pre-selection is a partial safeguard against dud
jokes. One study which admits to having encountered difficulties in
this respect is that of Doris and Fierman: two of their 'sexual
content' cartoons were misunderstood by 85% of the subjects. Though
the results for these cartoons were not used, one has to wonder
about the other cartoons The authors themselves aver that some
cartoons such as the two discarded may
"require certain knowledge not ... at the S's disposal."145
This remains a factor which is unmentioned in the vast bulk of the
literature.
Another difficulty in this kind of research is the 'evaluation
apprehension effect'. It is mentioned in passing in a number of the
studies, and refers in this context to feelings of embarrassment,
awkwardness or shame associated with the examination of tendentious
jokes/humour. Subjects can be unwilling to admit finding something
funny if attention has been focussed on the sexual or violent nature
of the comedic element, on the 'dubious' kind of pleasure involved
Gollob and Levine note this possibility and speculate about the
likely effect on the results:
"... it would be expected that humour ratings of cartoons
depicting highly aggressive, socially undesirable behaviour
would decrease more than the ratings of cartoons depicting
activities with a higher degree of social acceptability. 46
which is a problem because this is the direction in which the
appreciations were expected to move anyway according to a Freudian
repression-model. Gollob and Levine did take the precaution of
using only anonymous reporting-methods (cf. pg.175 above), as
suggested also by Wilson:
"It also seems important to limit the possibility of evalu-
ation-apprehension artefacts, to ensure that rated amusement
reflects private appreciation. This may be achieved, as in
the former experiments, by measuring anonymous and private
ratings. ,,147
This is probably as effective a measure as anything. Nowlis (1966)
notes in his work on Mood Adjective Checklists that
"... it appears ... that the social desirability status of a
word has very little, if any, effect on how it is checked
when the subject is asked to report ... "148
Nevertheless the evaluation appreciation effect is likely to remain
a thorn in the side of any research dealing with potentially
'socially undesirable' pleasures.
A final problem common to all experiments of this kind, indeed
to any kind of psychological experiment, is that of the experimental
subject's attitude to the experiment. Each subject comes to such an
experiment with particular demands, expectations, and an idea about
what the whole business may be about, and this is true also of more
flexible experimental situations such as questionnaires and inter-
views. As Martin Orne points out,
"... the student volunteer is not merely a passive responder
- 228 -
in an experimental situation but rather he has a very real
stake in the successful outcome of the experiment."149
Moreover
"... the totality of cues which convey an experimental
hypothesis to the sublect become significant determinants of
subjects' behaviour." 50
Orne's term for this factor affecting the subject's experimental
behaviour is the "demand characteristic of the experimental situa-
tion" and he goes on to make the heuristic assumption that
"... S's behaviour in any experimental situation will be
determined by two sets of variables: a) those that are tra-
ditionally defined as experimental variables, and b) the
perceived demand characteristics of the experimental situa-
tion."151
The situation can then become extremely complex. The subject may
correctly guess the purpose of the research, and the usual
consequence is a desire to comply, to co-operate in proving the
experimenter's hypothesis correct 152 A conscientious experimenter
will try to detect such behaviour and exclude those results but a
conscientious subject may surely conceal her/his suspicions about
the experiment. The results can be
"... a pact of ignorance resulting from the intertwining
motives of both experimenter and subject, neither wishing to
create a situation where the particular subject's perfor-
mance needs to be excluded from the study."153
Though demand characteristics are mentioned by Gollob and Levine and
by Young and Frye, none of the research studied appears to consider
them as a factor in designing a particular experiment. Gollob and
Levine interviewed their subjects at the end of their study and
found that
"Although subjects felt that the study was concerned in some
way with aggression and humour, no subject seemed even
obliquely aware of the possibility that we were interested
in seeing whether the decrease in funniness from pre- to
post-test was different for different types of cartoon con-
tent. ,, 154
- 229 -
The implied conclusion that demand characteristics therefore did not
affect their results seems rather hasty. Still, Orne's own sugges-
tion is that post-experimental interviews might be the nearest thing
to a solution, though he also points out that interviews themselves
are subject to demand characteristics.
This obstacle can to some extent be combated by having the interview
conducted by a second experimenter who is not familiar with the
experimental behaviour or the results.
"When there is less time for awareness to impair and restrict
our pleasure, we may be misled by the form of the joke, and
feel that the passage is primarily funny, rather than ten-
dentious, believing that we are revelling in the humour not
the sin. Delivered with the right timing and surprise, the
joke may offer the furtive joy of ignoring taboos."155
The project of this thesis is to look at why (and when and how)
this 'furtive joy' is available to some people and not to others,
particularly in relation to Monty Python. As we have seen, this is
likely to depend on a number of factors, including the specific form
of each comedic element, the timing and surprise-value, the viewing
context, and the psychoanalytic predisposition of the viewing
subject. We also need to bear in mind the possible strategies for
coping with humour which threatens to unearth anxieties which are
too deeply repressed to be released through comic or joke mecha-
nisms; we have mentioned the possible adoption of an investigative
mode (pg.171 above), and another strategy is to find something
amusing through i misrecognizing s the humour. Writing of satire
(Till Death Us Do Part comes to mind), Wilson notes that
"Obviously it is simpler and more economical for the bigot to
misunderstand a joke than to entertain doubts that may
reshape his life."156
- 230 -
Though in the case of excremental, grotesque or absurd humour there
may in some instances be less else to find funny instead, the same
may also apply.
To conclude, a modest reminder of one pitfall to be avoided:
"It seems likely that attempts to explain wit and humour
preferences by one factor alone give an incomplete picture
of the dynamics of wit and humour."157
The development of a methodology for a study of a 'Meaning of
Life' audience.
1. This section will constitute a report on work-in-progress and,
though I have attempted to structure it in a coherent way, there
will necessarily remain loose ends which have not been followed up.
In particular this section will include a brief outline of 'effects'
and 'uses and gratifications' models of audience response; (this
will be brief: subsection 4), but I do not intend at this point to
dignify this section with subheadings. Though there will be an
overall trajectory from a slightly more theoretical/global consider-
ation of audience studies through a central section on Janice
Radway's version of reader-response analysis and culminating in some
remarks on the methodological/statistical questions thrown up by her
approach, examples from her work will tend to punctuate the whole of
this section.
2. Janice Radway's work on a group of American women who habitually
read romance novels l was suggested as potentially useful in view of
the problems I was encountering developing a methodology for relat-
ing audience response to the comedic (specifically, excremental/
grotesque humour) to degrees of repression. It was felt that my
project of effectively trying to quantify repression (psychoanalyse
the audience?) and to measure 'degree of amusement' etc. was likely
to run into methodological as well as theoretical difficulties, and
that the questionnaire/interview methods and theoretical model used
by Radway may bear more fruit.
Radway used a sample of forty-two regular romance readers for
her questionnaire data, and conducted eight hours of taped discus-
sion sessions with sixteen of the most regular readers. It is
important to note that in addition to this an important amount of
data was provided by one Dot Evans, herself an avid romance reader
but also, significantly, supplier of a consumer-guide service on
romance novels to a large number of local women. Radway's respon-
dents were provided by Dot Evans. It is thus worth noting already
that the sample of readers was selected not according to pre-
determined demographic criteria but on the basis of their heavy use
of the commodity; Radway does, however, also look at the demographic
significance of such a choice.
Radway's literary object of study was a large number of romance
novels: the number is indeterminate since many were referred to
either repeatedly or occasionally in the interviews/discussions, and
many are used by Radway herself either illustratively or as objects
of particular lines of enquiry. She discusses at some length the
problems and consequences of such a diffuse object of study.
As we shall have reason to remark later, her study is exemplary
in its refusal of conclusive findings under the guise of some
(spurious?) scientificity. 2 The danger then, of course, is of a
relapse into impressionistic pseudo-analysis. Whether or not Radway
is guilty of such practice may emerge in what follows. In any case,
her approach certainly seems to take part in a
"... conviction that sooner or later mass-media research must
cease using raw demographic variables for its independent
variables, and simply amount of consumption for its depen-
dent variable."3
- 233 -
3. A first consideration in any applicability of Radway's methods
to film studies would have to include the (not necessarily problem-
atic) transfer from one medium to another. The specificity of
literary and cinematic institutions and of reading/viewing contexts
would have to be taken on board, as would the different signifying
practices of writing and film. Most problematic would be the nature
of the reading process itself and of the psychic relation of
'reader' and object-text. Though there are clearly points of
similarity between how books, TV and film are 'read',
"... the explanations employed by Dot and her women to inter-
pret their romance reading for themselves are thus represen-
tative in a general way of a form of behaviour common in an
industrial society where work is clearly distinguished from
and more highly valued than leisure ..."4
the differences are surely very significant. Interestingly, the
single reference in Radway's book to a comparison of the media
contains a confusion which is left unmentioned; for Dot Evans,
"reading ... draws the individual into the book because it
requires her participation ... she is quite sure that TV
viewing and film-watching are different."5
If it is true that television does not implicate the viewer because
it demands her/his participation less than does a book, what is
missing here is any mention of the power of the mimetic image, of
scopic drives which encourage, perhaps even demand, an unconscious
investment in the act of watching.
Though this question cannot be pursued here, it is crucial to
the differences which beset debates about effects, uses and gratifi-
cations, interpretation, encoding and decoding in the areas of
TV/film and literature respectively. The following potted summary
of the debate as I see it in the area of TV/film will be supple-
mented be a commentary on relevant points emerging from Radway's
- 234 -
work; though this is no doubt theoretically/methodologically highly
suspect (I am not qualified to say much about the effects etc.
debate in literature studies anyway), I hope it may be useful
4. Audience-response in film/TV has tended to be regarded either as
'message-based', entailing some notion of what effects this message
has on the viewer/audience, or as 'user-based', entailing a more or
less conscious appropriation of the media artefact for the gratifi-
cation of some need.
Very schematically, the 'effects' approach was the first to gain
popular currency, to be gradually supplanted in the 1960's by the
'uses and gratifications' approach. We shall see below how this
overt schematisation neither takes into account the more complex
placement of much theoretical work along the way, nor provides
adequate notions on which to ground a more comprehensive model of
communications theory.8
"Research following the first strategy (message-effects) has
been, until recently, predominantly behaviourist in general
orientation: how the behaviour of audiences reflects the
influences on them of the messages they receive."7
James Halloran, in writing of early media research, said that
"manipulation, exploitation and vulnerability were the key words".8
"The myth of omnipotence" dies hard, and though the extreme manipu-
lation thesis has gone, assumptions about the power of the media
tend to linger on. Halloran identifies the development of social
science studies to take account of the 'cultural baggage' (always)
brought to a media product by a reader/viewer, and identifies the
danger of denying any effectivity to the medium:
- 235 -
"In general the trend has been away from the idea of
exploitation, away from an emphasis on the viewer as tabula
rasa, as someone wide open just waiting to soak up all that
is beamed at him. Now we think more in terms of interaction
or exchange between medium and audience, and it is recog-
nized that the viewer approaches every viewing situation
with a complicated piece of filtering equipment. This fil-
ter is made up not only of his past and present, but
includes his views and hopes for the future. We should wel-
come this change in emphasis but there is always a possibil-
ity that in making the shift the baby might be thrown out
with the bath water. Instead of having the false picture of
the all-powerful influence of television presented to us we
now run the risk of getting an equally false picture of no
influence whatsoever."9
This constitutes a good summary of the extreme positions of what we
are calling 'effects' and 'uses and gratifications', but in practice
there are certainly relatively few adherents to the limit-positions
themselves. I want now to try to map onto that trend (insofar as it
is/has been operative) a particular theoretical development which
may have lagged behind that trend in time, but which nonetheless has
an important relation to it. In concentrating on one of the ways in
which the film-text/viewer relationl has been theorised, we shall
effectively be starting at the 'effects' end of our putative 'spec-
trum'.
The notion of the (film) text as a 'semiotic machine' with its
own effectivity can be seen as a more sophisticated theorisation of
the 'effects' thesis, escaping the 'manipulation' tag but tending to
incur the equally derogatory accusation of determinism. In this
model the viewing subject engages with a text in which a certain
range of responses is possible. This is effected in two kinds of
ways. First, the viewer/reader is positioned in relations of specu-
larity, by a relation to the symbolic, which are primarily 'effects'
of the cinematic apparatus and of the viewing process, 11 or at least
of the dominant modes thereof. Second, the (illusory) position of a
- 236 -
unitary self-constituting subject is engendered by a number of
specific textual strategies, most famously Colin McCabe's 'classic
realist text'. 12 The argument is that every text is made of
discourses, and that typically these discourses are hierarchised so
that the narrative discourse, which naturalises existing socio-
economic relations and makes available for the subject a position of
knowledge about the other textual discourses, is privileged. As a
result, such texts can be seen to take on a 'productivity',
"... a productivity which has been frequently defined in
terms of the capacity of 'the' text to set viewers in place,
in a position of unproblematic identification/knowledge."13
so that the limit-case 'effect' is arrived at:
"viewing is not a moment of productivity, it is rather textu-
ally determined - a mere textual effect."14
Caricature apart, the question is whether McCabe (and others)
ever proposed this mechanism as totally overdetermining, or whether
it can be seen as a tendency resistible in the framework of an
oppositional reading practice. Though McCabe admits that his
original conception of the classic realist text was overly formal-
ist, "contaminated by formalism", by a "structuralism it claimed to
have left behind", and that
"The position outlined in my article made the subject the
effect of the structure (the subject is simply the sum of
positions allocated to it)."15
his subsequent move to an emphasis on text and viewer as forming a
single system in which the text cannot be held to have any separate
existence implies (but perhaps only implies) that the relation
(hence the reading) must be determined both by the textual oper-
ations and by the subject's prior social positioning.
That this analysis needs to be "in a determinate social
moment" 18 is also a clear indication that the subject's position,
insofar that it varies historically, will partly determine the
relations held with the text; elsewhere McCabe underlines this
specificity,
"That the breaking of the imaginary relation between text and
viewer is the first pre-requisite of political questions in
art has, I would hold, been evident since Brecht. That the
breaking of the imaginary relationship can constitute a
political goal in itself is the ultra-leftist fantasy of the
surrealists and of much of the avant-garde work now being
undertaken in the cinema. "17
stressing that the undermining of the imaginary relation between
text and viewer is a valid project only with specific texts or
groups of texts and with specific viewers/audiences.
Nevertheless it would appear that what McCabe has chiefly
advocated18 is not a rereading of classic realist texts from the
point of view of some oppositional or 'symptom-reading' strategy
(hence he seems after all to endorse the inevitability of spectator
position?) but rather a change in the texts offered for consumption,
calling for the use of Brechtian practices which problematise the
viewer's position with regard to the text and offer no single
position to the spectator. 19 There appears, then, to be an
exclusive concern with the means of representation.
With Sylvia Harvey's reiteration of this problem, in terms of
".. an ill-considered and unhelpful assumption that all
attempts at sociological research into the conditions of
reception or consumption of filmic texts can only be mani-
festations of the rashest empiricism. The baby (the study
of the conditions of consumption) has too often been thrown
out with the bathwater (the inadequacy of many of the meth-
ods employed).20
we can initiate a swing back towards our 'real' reader/viewer with
needs waiting to be gratified.
Certainly the ignoring of the 'real' socialised reader/viewer
and the assumption of a subject as entirely a "textual effect" would
be irredeemably formalist. Though some writers 21 have asserted that
McCabe was guilty of such formalism, my reading is that he did leave
space, at least in principle, for the 'real' viewer/viewing situa-
tion.
The arrival of our real viewer on the semiological scene is
succinctly signalled by Hardy, Johnston and Willemen, who observe
that the 'real' social subject
"... always exceeds the subject implied by the text because
he/she is also placed by a heterogeneity of other cultural
systems and is never coextensive with the subject placed by
a single fragment (i.e. one film) of the overall cultural
text."22
Morley summarises the relation of viewing subject and text:
"It follows that the meaning produced by the encounter of
text and subject cannot be read off straight from its 'tex-
tual characteristics' or its discursive strategies. We also
need to take into account what Neale describes as 'the use
to which a particular text is put, its function within a
particular conjuncture, in particular, institutional spaces,
and in relation to particular audiences.' A text should,
also, not be considered in isolation from the historical
conditions of its production and consumption - its insertion
into a context of discourses in struggle, in discursive for-
mations cohering into different strands of ideology and
establishing new condensations between them (cf. Laclau);
also its position in the field of articulation secured
between the discursive and economic/political practices.
Both the text and the subject are constituted in the space
of the interdiscursive; and both are traversed and inter-
sected by contradictory discourses - contradictions which
arise not only from the subject positions which these dif-
ferent discourses propose, but also from the conjuncture and
institutional sites in which they are articulated and trans-
formed.
The meaning(s) of a text will also be constructed dif-
ferently depending on the discourses (knowledges, preju-
-239 -
dices, resistances) brought to bear on the text by the
reader. One crucial factor delimiting this will be the
repertoire of discourses at the disposal of different
audiences. 23
This cannot be bettered in its defining of the relation between the
characteristics/discursive strategies of the text and the discourses
available to the reader in particular conjunctures. We can observe
at this point that this kind of conceptualisation bears more than a
passing resemblance to the definition of reader-response theory that
we shall encounter soon, and note also that the factors determining
the 'discursive fields' of readers/viewers will be both inclusive of
book-reading and film-viewing and differentially specific to those
activities. Thus the whole area of cultural competence/capital
would encompass a number of specific cultural activities, but
factors such as the immediate context of book or film consumption
(home, group, cinema/library etc.) would affect the available
discursive options open to the reader/viewer in different ways
according to whether it is a film or a book. We leave aside here
the crucial role of specifically psychoanalytic determinants in any
study of these discursive mappings.24
To return to film/TV studies more specifically, the work done by
Stuart Hall and David Morley 25 in particular has led to the
development of models of encoding and decoding of discourses in/from
(in this case televisual) media, with a stress on the relations of
congruence/non-congruence between the dominant 'positions' offered
in the TV programme/film and the 'positions' occupied by various
viewers.
This 'theoretical' trajectory (I repeat, overshematised and
necessarily highly selective), in a process arguably echoing that
detectable in the 'empirical' literature, brings us to the other end
of our spectrum and the postulation of uses and gratifications,
which supposes some active selection process on the part of the
viewer/reader. Some discursive elements may be appropriated
'straight' (naturalistic detail, messages congruent with the sub-
ject's world-view), some may be accepted in a negotiated way, and
others may be rejected or ignored 28 (political/ideological filtering
devices keep out objectionable discourses, including discourses
which contradict 'experience'):
"For these workers the films do not have an 'operative char-
acter'; they do not draw from them any material which they
could use to cope more actively with their problems. On the
contrary: they avoid concerning themselves with the inter-
pretations offered by the films."27
The question then is of how this 'selection' is to be theorised.
I would argue that some psychoanalytic or psychological model is
necessary in order to avoid the crudest voluntarism, and also that
some notion of 'needs' is indispensable as pretext for 'uses'. Thus
(Radway's own) observations that "they know exactly how the chosen
book will affect their state of mind" 28 and "they know perfectly
well why they like to read" 28 would need to be interrogated as to
precisely what needs were being satisfied and in what way. It may
be true, but it is not sufficient, to say with Richard Hoggart that
"within this kind of aesthetic art is conceived as 'margi-
nal', as 'fun', as something 'for you to uset."2/3
To be fair, Radway does pursue the question of needs in some detail
(see below). To look ahead, however, it is difficult to think of
the needs being catered for, by the comedic in general or by the
- 241 -
grotesque/excremental of The Meaning of Life in particular, in other
than psychoanalytic terms. Radway herself implicitly recognizes the
double-bind of conscious motivation underpinned by unconscious
factors in the following passage:
"Dot and the Smithton women know well both how and why they
read romances ... Yet at the same time thy also act on
social assumptions and corollaries not consciously available
to them precisely because those very givens constitute the
very foundations of their social selves, the very possibil-
ity of their social action.m31
As we shall see, however, this latter observation does not inhibit
Radway from placing a great deal of credence upon the Smithton
women's conscious opinions and evaluations.
We have now traced the 'spectrum' from the extreme 'effects'
position in which
"every literary text ... is composed of fixed textual fea-
tures and devices that have certain undeniable functions and
effects on the reader. 32
to an overtly voluntaristic perspective in which individual read-
ers/viewers consciously use each media artefact for specific pur-
poses. 33 The area which may be most productive in this context for
pointing the way forward in my own research is that of encod-
ing/decoding mentioned above, yet we shall have to bear in mind that
"Structuralist semiotics, because it identifies the spectator
with the decoder, entrusts other scientific approaches (like
sociology and psychology) with the analysis of spectator-
ship."34
which in a way is where Radway's study came in. The move away from
strictly semiological models is also reflected thus:
"Whereas the mastering of the code ... was long considered
sufficient for receiving images and sounds, the consensus
now is that one must dispose of a comprehensive knowledge
... to appreciate the choices made, to follow the
consequences, to grasp emerging idiosyncrasies ..."35
With this and other above formulations we are equipped to approach
the audience model used by Radway in her study.
5. After the above material on the necessarily active role of the
social subject in interpreting or decoding the text, the approach
explicitly embraced by Radway reads as no surprise. She refers to
"... the fundamental premise of reader-response criticism
that literary meaning is not something to be found in a
text. It is ... an entity produced by a reader in conjunc-
tion with a text's verbal structure. The production process
is itself governed by reading strategies and interpretive
conventions that the reader has learned to apply as a member
of a particular interpretive community." 38 (original
emphasis)
Reader-response criticism is an area which I have not been able to
follow up, 37 but the resonances with some film/TV research are
clear. David Morley's work on Nationwide, for example, attempted to
address this question of groupings which tend to share cultural
competences (once again Pierre Bourdieu's model of cultural capital
seems very relevant). Referring to some work on the popularity of
kung-fu films among male urban working-class youth, Morley echoes
the argument that
"... the genre is popular to the extent that it 'fits' with
the forms of cultural competence available to this group. 38
Even closer to Radway's concerns, Morley also notes that an English
Studies Group at the Birmingham CCCS studied 'feminine romance'38
with a view to
"... (attempting) to establish the forms of inter-discursive
connections which can account for the purchase of particular
textual forms on particular categories of readers, under
determinate socio-historical conditions. 40
Another reformulation of this approach occurs in Suleiman and
Crossman:
"One rather elementary question is 'Who reads what?' In more
formal terms, how does membership in a given social group at
- 243 -
a given time influence, or even determine, one's reading
habits and taste?"41
Thus what is central to this kind of study is that both the extra-
textual and the intra-textual (explicitly referred to in Suleiman
and Crossman's title) are operative; a text produces a range of
possible or preferred subject positions which are entered by read-
ers/viewers in different ways according to their membership of
particular interpretive communities, cultural capital available etc.
The aim is then
"... to avoid, on the one hand, a semiological enquiry into
processes of signification considered in the abstract, out-
side of their sociohistorical conditions of existence, and
on the other hand, to avoid a reductionist sociological
approach which would neglect the specificity of practices of
signification. ,,42
6. A central and important part of Radway's initial strategy was to
turn her back (at least temporarily) on any notion of the objective
researcher as guarantor of some unitary explanatory truth about the
text.
"I soon realized I would have to give up my obsession with
textual features and narrative details if I wanted to under-
stand their views of romance reading."43
She decided to abandon
"... the particular theoretical assumptions that would have
justified the presentation of my own reading as a legitimate
rendering of the meaning of the genre for those who usually
read it."44
and asserts instead that
"... any semiotic account of a culture, termed by anthropolo-
gists an ethnographic account, is the product of an interro-
gation of one cultural system by another, carried out
through the interaction of ethnographer and informant."45
We can note in passing that Jean Rouch (many of whose films are of
an ethnographic/anthropological nature) is also very aware of this
'experimental effect',
- 244 -
"Most people refuse to recognize that any anthropology must
destroy what it investigates. Even if you are making a
long-distance observation of breast-feeding you disturb the
mother and her infant, even if you don't think so. The fun-
damental problem in all social sciences is that the facts
are always distorted by the presence of the person who asks
the questions. You distort the answer simply be asking the
question."48
and that
"his call for a participatory cinema is clearly based on
assumptions that ethnographic enquiry can never be objective
  
The degree to which Radway was (apparently) prepared to bracket
off her own 'analysis' whilst carrying out her field-work is illus-
trated by the remark:
"... when analysis proceeds from within the belief system
actually brought to bear upon a text by its readers, the
analytical interpretation of the meaning of a character's
behaviour is more likely to coincide with that meaning as it
is constructed by the readers themselves."48
In order for 'new knowledge' to be produced about her object of
study, of course, some input on Radway's part was bound to be
necessary; yet the willingness to enter the readers' own problematic
seems exemplary. Later Radway does reassert the multiplicity of
perspectives she employs, and writes of "looking at the romance-
reading behaviour of real women through several lenses." 49 At the
same time she is insistent (in her conclusion) that there is no
'objective' position from which the text can be 'read':
"... it will be impossible ... to use this conclusion to
bring a single, large picture into focus simply because
there is no context-free, unmarked position from which to
view the activity of romance-reading in its entirety. 50
Put yet another way,
"... the text, at the very instant that it reaches the very
essence of its ties with the interlocutor (revealing its
need for a subject as horizon of reference and opportunity
for profit), also demonstrates that this reality can be
found neither 'outside' of its domain, nor 'inside' at its
- 245 -
very core, - but has to achieve an integral relation between
inside and outside, as the sole possible basis."51
Radway thus elected to use the readers' own perceptions as the
starting-point:
"... to understand what the romance means, it is first essen-
tial to characterise the different groups that find it mean-
ingful, and then to determine what each group identifies as
its 'romance' before attempting any assessment of the sig-
nificance of the form ... We must begin to recognize this
fact of selection within the mass-production process."52
and indeed the bulk of her book is concerned with an analysis of
what romances/reading mean to the readers. What may be instructive
is that this last formulation would appear to have a more general
applicability. What kinds of groups identify Monty Python as
'their' comedy? In what ways do they see it as meaningful? What
kinds of needs do they Bee the Undertaker Sketch or exploding Mr.
Creosote as fulfilling for them? The fact of selection, be it of
romance novels or of Monty Python, indeed needs to be recognized,
and the persistent notion of a homogenous/universalized mass culture
resisted.
Even in her development of a Propp-inspired typology of romance
fiction narrative functions, Radway notes that it is
"... essential to observe that even this more standard form
of literary interpretation begins here in reader percep-
tions." 53 (my emphasis)
and the same applies to her analysis of character types. It is
worth stressing here that though (since Radway's detailed findings
about romance are not especially relevant to us) there is little
discussion in these pages of the content of the interviews and of
the models of narrative, character, the ideal novel etc. thrown up
by Radway's discussions with the women, this material takes up most
- 246 -
of her book. Only towards the last quarter or so of the book (and
particularly in the Conclusion) does she bring notions of language,
textual analysis, ideology, and to some extent psychoanalysis to
bear on what she has found out from her respondents.
7. Radway deals very lucidly with the way in which language can
function in (realist) literature. Bearing in mind the above-
mentioned conviction that
"... meaning is not something to be found in a text. It is
... an entity produced by a reader in conjunction with the
text's verbal structure..."54
she redefines part of her project as being
"... to trace the interaction between textual properties and
reading strategies."55
After briefly outlining some of the ways in which the figures of
conventional narrativistic language tend to constitute texts
'reflecting' the 'realist' ideology of the 19th century novel,"
Radway tellingly describes the transparency of the 'passive' reading
process:
"Although it is true that readers never discover meanings
'in' or behind the words they find on the page but actively
attribute significations to the verbal structures from their
own linguistic repertoire, it is nonetheless clear that Dot
and her women read the romantic text as if such simple dis-
covery of meaning was possible. In fact, the above-
mentioned linguistic techniques all maintain the illusion
that language is a transparent window opening out onto an
already existent world because the readers themselves treat
these linguistic features in a particular way..." 57 (origi-
nal emphasis)
"Dot seems to judge writing solely on the basis of the effi-
ciency with which it gets its job done, that is, tells the
story. 58
There is a parallel here with the unconsciousness of the 'reading'
process in relation to the comedic, and in particular to jokes.
Within any broadly Freudian paradigm the efficacy of a joke depends
- 247 -
upon its mechanisms remaining hidden. Certainly jokes are generally
judged according to how effective they are in doing their job, in
provoking laughter. It is also a commonplace that the 'ideological
work' carried out at an unconscious level by films (arguably less so
by TV programmes) is made possible by many levels of 'realism' from
the mimetic to the narrative. Maintaining our focus on the way in
which 'real' viewers may 'use' this 'realism' (and this is not to
discount the ideological work carried out by film), we can note
George Custen's observation 59 that films most (or at least very)
often act as just so much 'reality-data' to be incorporated into
everyday talk about any number of diverse subjects, and not as data
for speculation about 'meaning'. This again indicates the way in
which filmic discourse is frequently perceived as 'transparent', in
much the same way as is the language of romance fiction in Radway's
sample.6
The respondents' own view of the reading process is a challenge
to the reader-response theoretical model:
"... these women also believe that the author herself pro-
vided the meaning of the story for her readers by expressing
it in words. They believe that meaning is in the words only
waiting to be found. Reading is not a self-conscious, pro-
ductive process in which they collaborate with the author,
but an act of discovery..." 51 (original emphasis)
Thus instead of "... readers ... seen to be engaged in productive
work" albeit "under determinate conditions ... not of their own
choosing/162 we have readers "accepting without question the accuracy
of all statements". 63 What Radway is in fact arguing is that the
romance fictions read by her respondents are the kind of writing
which Roland Barthes calls 'readerly texts'. In invoking Barthes'
definitions we can again note how easily this would seem to be
- 248 -
transferable to the 'classic realist texts' of film and television.
For Barthes, the 'writerly text' is one which requires the reader's
active participation:
"Pourquoi le scriptible est-il notre valeur? Parce que
l'enjeu du travail litteraire (de la litterature comme trav-
ail), c'est de faire du lecteur, non plus un consommateur,
mais un producteur du texte. Notre litterature est marquee
par le divorce impitoyable que l'institution littgraire
maintient entre le fabricant et l'usager du texte, son pro-
prigtaire et son client, son auteur et son lecteur. Ce lec-
teur est alors plonge dans une sorte d'oisivitg,
d'intransitivitg, et, pour tout dire, de serieux: Au lieu de
jouer lui-mSme, d'acceder pleinement a l'enchantement du
signifiant, a la volupte de l'ecriture, il ne lui reste plus
en partage que la pauvre liberte de recevoir ou de rejeter
le texte: la lecture n'est plus qu'un referendum. En face
du texte scriptible s'etablit donc sa contre-valeur, sa val-
eur negative, reactive: ce qui peut 8tre lu, mais non ecrit:
le lisible. Nous appelons classique tout texte lisible."64
(original emphasis)
"... all the linguistic practices discussed thus far mask the
reader's active collaboration in the production of textual
meaning. ,,65
8. The key concept (believe it or not) is the unconscious, which
enables us to touch on Radway's attention (either explicit or
implicit) to the psychoanalytic determinants in the reading process.
The first way in which she uses psychoanalytic categories is as
a part of her analysis of the functions fulfilled by the typical
'ideal heroine' as an identification-figure for the (female) roman-
ce-readers." Though Radway writes that
"... the initial function dictating the heroine's loss of
connections and identity is more deeply resonant in a psy-
choanalytic sense than it is overtly topical."67
this use of the psychoanalytic is particular to her object of study
and need not concern us here.
Secondly we have the repeated references already noted in
relation to a voluntarist notion of 'uses' (pp.240-242 above), which
clearly beg the question of the unconsciousness of the reading
process:
"... they know exactly how the chosen book will affect their
state of mind... "68
"... they know perfectly well why they like to read..."9
.. Dot and the Smithton women know well both how and why
they read romances. 70
Radway does explicitly recognize the unconscious aspect of the
reading activity,
"Yet at the same time they also act on social assumptions and
corollaries not consciously available to them precisely
because those very givens constitute the very foundations of
their social selves, the very possibility of their social
action."71
but it is striking how she tends systematically to 'trust' and (I
would say) overvalue her respondents' 'consciousness' of what they
are doing when reading.
Thirdly, and more interestingly in the context of my concern
with the comedic, Radway observes, in her comments on the practice
of rereading favourite romances, that sameness and difference can
both be a source of pleasure. This reminds us of the pleasures of
repetition and of discovery (pp.74-78 ff. above), and perhaps
constitutes a parallel with the pleasure of new/different comedic
elements set in the familiar psychic mechanisms of the joke and the
comic. When
"... (Dot) sees no contradiction in desiring an unpredictable
plot and wanting to know how it ends before she reads it
through. 72
this is a good example of the pleasure of novelty within a secure
context, the kind of pleasure provided by many generic TV programmes
and films, from formulaic sitcom to a new Monty Python film.
The unconscious provides a stepping-stone to the central cate-
gory of the ideological, which again Radway deals with both impli-
citly and, increasingly in the final two chapters, explicitly.
There is early comment 73 on the conflict between the apparently
very conventional 'message' of the romance novel and the womens'
claims that they 'use' the novels actively for self-enhancement.
Comparison with film/TV comedy is here oddly lopsided since the
supposed virtue of much comedy is its 'shock' value (briefly dis-
cussed under 'conflict function' pp.90-92 etc. above). Nevertheless
I would suggest that there may be a congruence between the way in
which ideologically conservative/reactionary texts (of which the
romance novels are arguably examples) may be actively used to fulfil
putatively oppositional needs, as Radway appears to suggest, and the
way in which comedic material which by virtue of its very form is
destined to fulfil a 'control function' may be reappropriated in
more active ways. Still, we must bear in mind Radway's formulation
"... no matter what the women intend their reading to say
about their roles as wives and mothers, the ideological
force of the reading experience could, finally, be a conser-
vative one."74
The question, we must remember, is how Radway handles such a pro-
posal in relation to her empirical work.
She identifies on a number of other occasions75 the conservative
ideological function of 'learning to live with' male aggressivity,
- 251. -
brutality, and even rape. There appears to be an acceptance by her
women respondents of their role as servicers of patriarchy, so that
for example
"she must close that book reassured that men and marriage
really do mean good things for women."78
To take up again the notion of 'active use' in response to needs
not being met by the womens' environment, Radway comments that
"... it will be necessary to consider the question of whether
romance fiction is actually deflecting or recontaining an
indigenous impulse to express dissatisfaction with the tra-
ditional status quo in the family bx persuading women to
feel more content with their role."17
"By resting satisfied with this form of vicarious pleasure,
the romance reader may do nothing to transform her actual
situation which itself gave rise to the need to seek out
such pleasures in the first place."78
Bearing in mind the problem (Radway's and, to some extent, mine) of
demonstrating this kind of hypothesis, it is nevertheless interest-
ing to note the similarity between this last formulation and that
relating to the conservative function of comedy advanced by Eric
Midwinter and cited in Section 2 above:
"By grinning at man's condition, by softening the edges of
his aggressive efforts to have wrongs righted, by channeling
his energies into the mill-race of laughter, by keeping his
pecker up, comedians may have helped resist the correction
of legitimate grievances ... it could be argued that they
help preserve the status quo, the unrocked boat and the sta-
bility of the social fabric."78
Another kind of ideological work done by many texts involves
articulating and reinforcing notions of 'how the world is' by means
of the commonplace, of common sense, through the imaginary relation
(cf. pp.101 & 131-133 above). Images (ideologies) about what
Althusser calls Ideological State Apparatuses are thus passed off as
'natural', as unchanging, and among these ISAs we find the family.
- 252 -
Consequently Radway is right to
"... wonder how much of the romance's conservative ideology
about the nature of womanhood is inadvertently 'learned'
during the reading process and generalized as normal, natu-
ral female development in the real world."8
Since we have also already noted the way in which the classic text
(pg.247 above) facilitates the articulation of such ideological
strands under the guise of 'realism', it is noteworthy that many
romance readers aspire to writing and indeed several of the most
successful/well-known romance novelists wrote their first books out
of a reader's love for the genre. As Radway notes,
"because romance authors share the same assumptions about
language and meaning, they write texts designed to be read
in this straightforward manner. 81
The complicity thus seems complete and it becomes more and more
difficult to accept that the romance reading can function in some
liberating proto-feminist way, as the respondents sometimes hint.
Indeed it is interesting that despite the injunctions which Radway
had placed upon herself to suspend 'her' readings, there is a
surprising and, throughout the book, rapidly accumulating amount of
material explicitly identifying the ideological function likely to
be fulfilled by romance reading. As we know, it is the subjection
of such explanatory models to (empirical) test that is the prob-
lem, 82 but still it is reassuring to see a professional writer's
methodological resolve slip in this way
10. What kinds of conclusions, then, is Radway able to arrive at?
She is at pains in her concluding section to stress again the
absence of any privileged site of knowledge from which definitive
conclusions can be drawn, and within the limits of her circumspec-
tion the following is as good a 'conclusion' as any:
- 253 -
"Although in restoring a woman's depleted sense of self
romance reading may constitute tacit recognition that the
current arrangement of the sexes is not ideal for her emo-
tional well-being, it does nothing to alter a woman's social
situation, itself very likely characterised by those dissa-
tisfying patterns. In fact, the activity may very well
obviate the need or desire to demand satisfaction in the
real world because if can be so satisfactorily met in fan-
tasy."83
The latter part of this formulation indeed fits well with Rosengren
and Windahl's idea of functional alternatives. 84 Radway also goes
on to suggest that
"... the study's investigation of reading as act suggests
that real people can use the romance to address their unmet
needs experienced precisely because that ideal relationship
is made highly improbable by the institutional structure and
engendering practices of contemporary society. Furthermore,
the focus on reading as a process of construction reveals
that the early stages of a reader's interpretation and
response to the romantic form can be characterised by the
expression of repressed emotions deriving from dissatisfa-
ction with the status quo and a utopian longing for a better
life. ,,85
In that the need for satisfying relationships, according to this
argument, cannot be fulfilled because of the nature of contemporary
society (an 'environmental' constraint), the compensatory activity
of romance reading can again be easily situated in the Rosengren-
Windahl model. Finally, in restating the tentative conclusion that
"Given the apparent power of the romance's conservative coun-
ter-messages, then, it is tempting to suggest that romantic
fiction must be an active agent in the maintenance of the
ideological status quo because it ultimately reconciles
women to patriarchal society and reintegrates them with its
institutions. ,,86
Radway returns us to the vexed problem of provability with
"I feel compelled to point out, however, that neither this
study nor any other to date provides enough evidence to cor-
roborate this argument fully."87
One has to wonder, given the centrality of the unconscious (hence of
the psychoanalytic) in theories of patriarchy and ideology, what
could adequately constitute 'evidence' ... Gellner's somewhat
- 254 -
discouraging warning will have to stand in for any more sustained
argument at this point,
"It is not so much that empiricism is in some way specially
vulnerable to the kind of criticism to which Chomsky sub-
jected Skinner; it is rather, that very few thinkers have
rendered other theories of knowledge similarly vulnerable,
by making a reasonably sustained effort to use them as the
base of a genuinely operationalised explanatory model. Were
this done, it is most unlikely that those other theories of
knowledge would fare any better." 88 (original emphasis)
though an approach based on a film/TV version of reader-response
theory seems as good a way to try as any. Radway's own pointer to
the future is that
"We simply do not know what practical effects the repetitive
reading of romances has on the way women behave..."I*9
and she identifies a necessary strategy of 'in-depth interviewing'
about marriage, sexual relationships etc. This is encouraging since
my own original idea was to interview respondents with a view to
establishing something about attitudes to anality, repression-levels
and BO on. But, given Radway's own caution (never mind Gellner's),
would this 'prove' anything?
11. The original impetus of this piece of work on Janice Radway's
study was to make some comments on her methodology and her use of
statistics, with a view to the possible relevance of her strategies
to my own work. Many such comments have already now been made in
passing, but this is a place to bring them together.
We have already noted Radway's eschewing of the habitual
researcher's position of unitary knowledge in favour of a spirit of
provisional knowledge based on mutual interrogation of both respon-
dent and observer functions. At times, however, she shows signs of
slipping back into an essentialist pose with phrases such as
- 255 -
"... specify as clearly as possible what (the novels) in fact
mean" 90
"... to understand what the romance means, it is first essen-
tial..." 91
or else toppling over into an endorsement of her respondents' mode
on thinking which can only be self-fulfilling:
"... when analysis proceeds from within the belief system
actually brought to bear upon a text by its readers, the
analytical interpretation of the meaning of a character's
behaviour is more likely to coincide with that meaning as it
is constructed and understood by the readers themselves."92
Perhaps these are carping criticisms which only a saint or an
insufferable pedant would succeed in avoiding. Be that as it may,
discussion became central to Radway's research method. Though
clearly this carries with it its own difficulties as regards analy-
sis of the discussion content, there are equally clearly many
advantages, not least the degree of spontaneity/lucidity it may be
possible to elicit from respondents. One interesting consequence in
Radway's work was the emergence, through discussion, of the distinc-
tion between 'escape' and 'relaxation'. In the initial pilot
questionnaire, fourteen women volunteered (undirected) that they
liked romance fiction because it allowed them to 'escape', while
only one mentioned 'relaxation'. 93 A few of the (more articulate)
women then operated as agenda-setters, so that
"Although most of the other women settled for the word
'escape' on the first questionnaire, they also liked their
sister readers' term better. Once these were introduced in
the group interviews, the other women agreed that romance
reading functions best as relaxation and as a time for self-
indulgence."94
Radway's modified questionnaire then incorporated this feedback, and
a question can then be posed about the relative validity of findings
before and after such 'consciousness-raising' discussion.
- 256 -
Another problem, which Radway readily acknowledges on more than
one occasion, is the statistical non-representativity of her sample,
"the conclusions from the study, therefore, should be extra-
polated only with great caution to apply to other romance
readers."95
echoed by Custen's modest claim to be "descriptive" 98 and Morley's
reference to "a partially illustrative function". 97 Given the
limited size of her sample and her calls for caution, however,
Radway is at times perhaps a trifle presumptuous - or speculative
- with her inferences. At the risk of labouring a marginal point,
here is an example:
"Although 40 percent of the heavy readers (those who had read
more than twenty-five books in the last six months) reported
having read a romance, thus suggesting the possibility of a
correlation of high levels of consumption and romance read-
ing, the study gives no indication of how many of the
romance readers actually read anywhere near the number the
Smithton women report, which ranges from twenty-four to more
than six hundred romances every six months. I think it is 
safe to say that the Smithton group's reliance on the
romances is not strictly comparable to that of the occa-
sional reader." 98 (my emphasis)
This stands in marked contrast to the statistical rigour which
characterised the studies discussed in Section 4 above. Considering
the contrast, it was probably a wise decision for Radway not to use
any of her statistical material in her discussion of psychoanalytic
theory. 99
To return, lastly, to the problem of adequate 'proof'; at one
point Radway reiterates her caution:
"I do not intend to minimize the difficulty of proving ...
accuracy. .100
and on the same page, as part of her discussion of the failure of
some romances because of the nature of their portrayal of the male
hero, she seems to base her argument on
- 257 -
"It seems entirely plausible .../... it might also sug-
gest... "101
Perhaps it is unkind to criticise this kind or thing, but if I am to
err through an overambitiously scientistic orientation, it is at
least reassuring to find traces of the same tendency in the respect-
able literature
12. To conclude with three final observations about possible ways
forward in my current research.
First there is the beguiling idea of using the model developed
by Rosengren and Windahl 102 to try to address the needs satisfied by
the Monty Python-comedic, preferably in specific instances, for
individual viewers. Here some choice would need to be made about
whether to concentrate on 'Monty Python fans' as Radway concentrated
on habitual romance readers, or to look at a range of potential
responses including rejection and indifference. As Morley points
out, there is
"the necessity to recognize, in the first instance, the ques-
tion of the viewers' positive or negative response to the
text as a particular cultural form - do they enjoy it, feel
bored by it, recognize it as at all relevant to their con-
cerns? These questions need to be asked before exploring
whether or not they 'agree, disagree or partly agree' with
the ideological propositions of the text."103
We must also bear in mind that
"boredom is a political reaction which must always be ana-
lysed and understood..104
and that 'the political' is coextensive with the socioeconomic
context which produces forms of repression and attitudes to the
excremental/grotesque.
Secondly, we need to take on board the points made by Morley
about the (re)introduction of notions of genre with regard to
'interpretive communities' (cf. pp.243-244 above). Each 'genre' or
type of programme/film (Monty Python would here constitute a good
example)
"requires the viewer to be competent in certain forms of
knowledge and to be familiar with certain conventions which
constitute the ground or framework within/on which particu-
lar propositions can be made."105
Clearly notions of cultural competence then become central. What
kinds of people enjoy(ed) Monty Python at the time of the original
TV series, and now? What kinds of cultural competences were
then/are now likely to make a viewer part of such an interpretive
grouping?
"Crucially these categories are to be defined in terms of
forms of cultural competence: however, what is then to be
explored is the way in which these cultural forms are dis-
tributed in relation to the social structural position of
these different sections of the audience."1"
Finally, the problem of what form the audience study should take
now becomes a pressing concern. Our scrutiny of Radway's work has
raised the question of what exactly can be got from an analysis of
taped discussion. We must bear in mind that
"'Meaning' and 'interpretation' ... is a kind of viewer
response to film that, as a speech event, is severely lim-
ited to specific conversational contexts (film-makers dis-
cussing a film, or persons in various states of coercion,
such as research or classrooms ...) where talk about mean-
ings may be expected to occur."
and that
"unless specifically called for - either by vocation or
research context to name but two coercions - viewers'
notions of 'meaning' inhere to the social use of film, and
not merely its implied message."17
We are thus firmly back with Radway's dilemma of whether to impose a
- 259 -
template reflecting 'what we want to find out (about)' or whether to
use the reader/viewer as a 'guide'.
Francesco Casetti writes of
"... a horizon which can very aptly frame the research on
film when one decides (by simply following the spectator) to
ask how the film entertains its interlocutor, how it founds
his/her presence, organizes his/her action etc., in a word,
how the film says 'you'. .108
The question is, how to follow the spectator?
The Research: Watching and talking about 'Meaning of Life'.
6.1 Introduction to the section.
As will probably have emerged, particularly in Section V above,
there are serious difficulties and drawbacks associated with both
'effects' research and with the 'uses and gratifications' approach.
It seems to me useful to combine what is 'correct' from both tenden-
cies, and indeed the resulting 'critical' paradigm has been
expressly favoured in much of the work which has developed over the
last ten years.1
"The shared concern here is not so much with the media's
effects on beliefs and values. The media are seen here as
primary agencies of socialisation, whose function is to
engineer consent to a 'dominant ideology', and thereby to
contain and suppress opposition to the State and to the rul-
ing class."2
While the dual nature of the 'critical' paradigm is implicit in
much recent work in this area, it would have to be said that there
has been a tendency in the research to neglect 'the audience' and to
concentrate on the nature of media texts. We have seen above
(pp.236-240) how the reading/viewing subject can be at the mercy of
the tyrannical text, and how such a monolithic notion of the text as
articulator of (only) dominant ideologies ignores the role of the
decoder, of the audience.
This is probably in no small measure due to the nature of media
'effects' postulated within the critical paradigm; as ideological
effects, they would generally be both more complex and more long-
- 261 -
term than the kinds of effects typically studied within the
'effects' tradition. The resulting problem is that
"... these ideological effects are far more diffuse and hard
to identify; and in this sense, the hypotheses and asser-
tions about the causal role of the media which are typically
made by 'critical' researchers have been significantly dif-
ficult to prove in empirical terms.3
While this is true and represents a problem homologous to that
identified in the Introduction there nevertheless remains, within
this model, plenty of room for an emphasis on the audience, on
active viewing/reading selection made on the basis of existing
individual preferences.
The chief weakness which this brings is that related to 'needs':
what sorts of 'needs' are being 'gratified', and at what level?
"The implicit assumption that there are basic, pre-existing
human needs which the media satisfy ignores the possibility
that the media themselves may create 'needs' and thereby
perform an active ideological role. The reliance on asking
individuals to state their own needs ignores the possibility
that there may be 'unconscious' needs which they are unable
or unwilling to acknowledge."4
Analysis and interpretation of discussion/interview material thus
itself becomes a problem.
"The obvious way of finding out what someone thinks in
response to television is to ask them. However, as most of
us are aware, there is as large a gap between what we can
put into words and what we think as there is between what we
can do and how we can explain it. What we say is itself a
set of meanings, which may or may not be what we really
understand - and we may well understand more than we are
ever conscious of."5
The empirical difficulty of working on long-term ideological
effects is thus compounded by the unconscious nature of the read-
ing/viewing process itself and the complexity of the 'needs' being
serviced. The comedic and other pleasures of watching Monty
- 262 -
Python's Meaning of Life must have social functions, but also (as we
have argued at length above in Section 2), psychological functions
to do with repetition, discovery, and management of repression.
What kind of empirical work, then, could be undertaken in such a
field? It may be worth indicating schematically three types of work
which have typified the research in this area.
Laboratory experiments, designed in such a way as to offer the
researcher maximum control over the factors which may influence the
outcome, have most generally been concerned with the relation
between two particular variables, for example blood-pressure and
hours of TV watched per day. The emphasis has been (cf. Section 4
above, especially pp.186-187) on tight control of all other vari-
ables, on replicability, above all on quantitative measurement and
rigorous statistical processing of all data. Control groups have
been virtually mandatory. All of this has helped to confer on
laboratory experiments an air of (sometimes spurious) scientificity.
We have observed some of the pitfalls of some of these more
'scientific' approaches in Section 4 above. There is a more general
(and in this context fundamental) flaw in this mode of research.
This is the artificiality of the 'laboratory experiments'; even if
an impeccably designed experiment with excellent controls were to
clearly demonstrate, for example, that male and female subjects did
not differ in their humorous response to Monty Python, and even if
that result was replicated, it would give little indication of how
those subjects would behave in 'real life'. Film, television, and
other media coexist with many other factors which 'affect' attitudes
and behaviour, so that
" ... while such experiments may indicate the factors which
can influence behaviour, they are unable to identify with
any certainty those which actually do - and as such, their
predictive power is very limited." 6 (my emphasis)
Survey methods certainly appear to avoid this problem of
artificiality, and to promise readier access to what is 'really'
going on. In principle a survey method should be able to cover a
larger group of subjects than a rigorous experiment, and could
therefore claim to be more representative. The question of what
'scientific' status survey data can have is, however, a vexed one,
and is largely dependent on the form of the survey material and on
how it is administered. Clearly a highly structured questionnaire
with a very limited response choice, administered under test condi-
tions where random/spurious/careless responses could be minimised,
would be most statistically acceptable, but what can be learned from
such an exercise?
"Inevitably, the kinds of questions which are asked will tend
to determine the kinds of responses which are obtained: if
one is looking for particular 'effects', one is bound to
design questions which maximise the chances of perceiving
them, and thereby run the risk of exaggerating their impor-
tance."7
The more 'productive' survey mode would seem to be the taped inter-
view or discussion. Since, however, this involves spending much
more time with each (group of) respondent(s), the representativity
of findings based on this kind of research becomes, for practical
reasons, notional. The relatively enhanced resources enjoyed by
Janice Radway and David Morley, whose work is exemplary in this
area, did not enable them to overcome the labour-intensive nature of
in-depth interviewing. The impetus is thus necessarily towards a
- 264 -
descriptive knowledge rather than any 'proof' or any quantitative
demonstration.
Field experiments seek to eliminate the drawbacks of both the
modes of research while retaining their strengths: subjects are
observed in their 'natural' surroundings (at home, in a cinema, at
work etc.) and one aspect of their environment is varied (for
example a particular film is inserted into the evening's TV view-
ing). The key element here is the 'observation', for it is diffi-
cult to avoid either the need for some supplementary survey material
on how the (film) was perceived/responded to, or the artificiality
of some experimental observation procedure. The work of Peter
Collett of Oxford University, which involved installing a video
camera in each sample-household TV set so that whenever the televi-
sion was on, the space in front of the set was recorded on video-
tape, seems like an excellent tool for this kind or research, though
(again) one is faced with the impossible question: what would be
happening if the camera was not there? Reservations also exist
about what can be 'learned' from such an exercise; again it seems
that the best way to find out about how people watch film/television
is to ask them.
In terms of the three research methodologies outlined above, the
model which I chose was closest to the 'survey' type. Subjects
viewed Monty Python's Meaning of Life in what was technically a
'laboratory' setting, but which was hopefully relatively stress-
free, approximating a 'social' event: perhaps somewhere between a
laboratory and a field Though a Mood Adjective Check List and a
Humour Appreciation Test were administered in as standard a way as
- 265 -
possible, other elements of the research procedure remained more
open-ended. An (optional) questionnaire was sent to all initial
respondents, a semi-structured interview/discussion was recorded
immediately after each screening, and indeed the interview material
will constitute the bulk of the data discussed below. In these
respects the considerable influence of Janice Radway's work is to be
detected. 8
The principal sections of this account of my research will deal
with the preparation, the procedure, and the mode of analysis
employed, and then with analysis of the interview tapes and of the
other material.
6.2 Preparation
It was decided to use the material outlined in a provisional
draught model prepared in early 1987. The Mood Adjective Check List
(MACL) and the Humour Appreciation Test (HAT) were retyped and
copied more or less verbatim, whereas some parts of the question-
naire were reworded before typing and copying. Copies of all three
items are included in the Appendices.
As expected, the most feasible way of organizing the screenings
and interviews was to arrange a number of (video) screenings for
projected groups of 3-5 respondents, with a total sample of some
20-30 subject. It thus seemed sensible to plan for between five and
eight separate screenings. A room with video and TV monitor facili-
ties was booked at the University of London Extra-mural Department
(32, Tavistock Square, London) for six sessions between 3rd and 13th
- 266 -
June 1987. The sessions were arranged for a variety of days and
times to enable a maximum of potential respondents to attend. In
addition to this, I expected to conduct two or three sessions at
home for those who found this more convenient.
A prior choice had been made to eschew any attempt to look at a
representative cross-section or systematically selected social
group. It was decided instead that I should concentrate on 'heavy
users', or at least on those with an interest in Monty Python. By
placing advertisements in a few (selected) publications and on a few
notice-boards, I hoped to solicit as many responses as possible, to
send questionnaires to all those interested, and to obtain the
desired sample of respondents for the screenings and interviews. The
following advertisement was placed in 'City Limits' and 'Time Out'
for the first week in May, and in 'Marxism Today' and in 'New
Socialist' for May 1987:
"LOOKING FOR MONTY PYTHON. Wanted: respondents to help with
audience research on comedy. tel. 0442 59852 (eves.)"
A longer version of the advertisement (advertising in magazines is
expensive) was also prepared:
"LOOKING FOR MONTY PYTHON. Are you a Monty Python fan? Or
do you find Monty Python grotesque, infantile, unfunny? I
am looking for respondents to help me with audience research
on comedy. Please 'phone (0442) 59852 (evenings). Ask for
Jan."
This appeared during May on the University of London notice-board in
Malet Street, London, and at the same time on the Hemel Hempstead
public library notice board. As a result of the latter placement I
was approached by a reporter from the local newspaper and a report
(complete with phone number and photograph) subsequently appeared in
the Hemel Hempstead Gazette on 15th May 1987.
- 267 -
The response was (surprisingly) disappointing. While it is
obvious that the choice of publications was bound to affect the
volume and nature of replies to my advertisements, the extremely low
level of interest was nevertheless (to me) unexpected.
The four magazines between them accounted for five responses, of
which two were from teachers/writers themselves interested in comedy
research; in the event four of these respondents completed the
questionnaires, but none were able to take any further part in the
research project.
There were no responses to the advertisement in the University
of London Union. The local library card produced two enquiries,
which resulted in one respondent who completed the questionnaire and
later attended a screening/interview session. Interestingly, the
local newspaper report attracted five responses and the possibility
of eight questionnaires; eventually four questionnaires were
returned and two people took part in a screening/interview.
The strategy of attracting a sample of respondents interested in
Monty Python had clearly failed; it became urgently necessary to
find an alternative.
Between September 1986 and April 1987 I had been a joint tutor
for a University of London Extra-mural Department Diploma course in
Film Studies. I had mentioned in passing that I was carrying out
some research on Monty Python, and a few of the students had
expressed interest. Some 30 students had begun the two-term course
and about 20 were more or less there at the end. It seemed that the
- 268 -
socioeconomic/demographic profile of such a group of evening-class
students should not differ too greatly from that one could have
expected for the non-existent magazine respondents, and consequently
it was decided to approach as many of the (ex) students as possible
to solicit their co-operation.
None of the people who could be contacted in this way declined
to help with the first part of the project, and so 20 questionnaires
were sent out. Of these, 18 were returned completed, 3 with apolo-
gies for being unable to attend the subsequent screening/discussion
session. 9 Of the remaining 15 respondents, 11 eventually attended
the screening/interview.
In addition to this, three (non-British) friends and an ex-
school colleague filled in the questionnaire and watched the film.
The ex-colleague also took part in a discussion as an ordinary
subject. One of the friends (a Monty Python fan from Germany) took
part in a pilot session so that any problems with MACL/HAT adminis-
tration or the mechanics of the interview could be sorted out before
the first session proper. The results of the pilot session are
included in Fig.6, which tabulates the number of respondents who
took part at each stage.
Questionnaires were thus received completed from 31 respondents.
Of these, 18 watched a video-tape of Monty Python's Meaning of Life,
and 16 of the latter also took part in an 'interview' which was
recorded for transcription and analysis.
6.3 Procedure
Five of the screening/interview sessions took place, then, at
Tavistock Square between 3rd and 13th June 1987. In addition to the
pilot session, two meetings were arranged at our home in Hemel
Hempstead.
It is worth underlining here the observation made by a number of
researchers about arranging for respondents to attend at a particu-
lar place and time. In this case the respondents were already (more
or less) known to me; after an initial telephone call the question-
naires had been sent out, and most returned. Each person was then
contacted, again by telephone, and a definite date and time
arranged. Of the 15 London respondents who had expressed willing-
ness to attend the screening, one could not be contacted. One did
not attend the arranged session, then excused himself as unable to
manage any other time. One simply didn't turn up. Another did not
come, and again did not arrive for a rearranged date. Of the 11 who
attended, one was at a rearranged date and one (L21) arrived 30
minutes late (cf. Fig.6). The final proportion of respondents
taking part in the screening and interview was probably as high as
it could have been given the commitments (and idiosyncrasies) of
those involved; what we note here is the disproportionate amount of
work that was needed in order to secure the actual audience that was
used.
The screening/interview sessions were carried out in as infor-
mal/relaxed a manner as possible, but nevertheless within a frame-
work where the MACL and HAT tests were always administered at the
- 270 -
Respondent
Questionnaire
sent out
Questionnaire
returned
Screening MACL HAT intervie
m	 ID
H1 / / / II /
H2 / / / II /
H5 / / / II / /
H7 / / / II /
H8* / /
H9 / /
H10 /
H11 / / / /	 / / /
H12 / / / /1 /
H13 / / / II / /
Li / /
L2 / /
L3 / /
L5 / / / II / /
L6 / / / II / /
L7 / /
L9 / /
L10 / / / II / /
Lll /
L12 / / / /1 / /
L13 / / / II / /
L14 / / / II / /
L15 / /
L16 / / / II / /
L17 / / / /1 / /
L18 / /
L19 / /
L20 / /
L21 / / / ** / / /
L22 / / / 1/ / /
L23 / / / II / /
L24 / /
L25 / /
* Two further questionnaires (unnumbered) were sent to H8
(friends/family were interested) but were returned uncompleted.
** L21 was 30 minutes late for a screening at which he was the only
subject. He said he knew the film well. We did not have time to
view the entire film, and decided not to complete the MACL
exercise. The last HAT entry is also missing (cf. Fig.10 below).
Fig.6 Respondents taking part in each part of the research proiect
same stage and in the same way. Each subject was welcomed with a
glass of wine or fruit-juice, and when everyone was settled the
first MACL test was given out, completed and collected. The sub-
jects were then told that we would be watching a video of Monty
Python's Meaning of Life, and some brief comment about whether they
had seen it before, whether they had enjoyed it or not, etc. was
encouraged. It was stressed that their responses were of equal
interest whatever their feelings about the film. The HAT sheets
were then handed out and the procedure of stopping the film at
various points made clear.
A (VHS) tape of the film was then shown. There will be no
attempt at any structural or content-analysis here; 1 a number of
pertinent comments have punctuated the whole of this opus so far,
and more will no doubt appear when we look at the interview trans-
cripts. It may be as well at this point, however, to outline the
diachronic sequencing of Meaning of Life ll and to (re)define some of
the salient points which will be of interest in the analysis below.
HAT 1 The film begins with a 'trailer' entitled 'The Crimson
Permanent Assurance', directed by Terry Gilliam and with its own
credit sequence. Lasting some 20 minutes, this is a conventional
narrative about how the (elderly) employees of a ruthless conglomer-
ate revolt against their younger overlords, take over the 'ship' and
set out on the seas of international finance, there to extract
good-hearted piratical revenge on their erstwhile competitors. The
Python team do not appear in this 'sketch' except when Terry Gilliam
and Michael Palin show up as bemused window-cleaners caught up in
the Crimson Permanent Assurance's attack on the Very Big Corporation
- 272 -
of America; within the context of the swashbuckling musical that
this clearly is, the various parts - the disgruntled elderly (echoes
here of the TV Pythons' 'Hell's Grannies' etc.) and the heartless
but ultimately weak young 'masters' - are played relatively
'straight'.
The section is a curiosity in Python terms, and seems to have
been agreed on to indulge Terry Gilliam's directing experimentation.
In the book of the film it appears within the body of the film,
after the song which closes the 'Live Organ Transplants' section and
before 'The Autumn Years'. In the video version at least, the whole
narrative has become a 'trailer', though there is an interesting
reference back to it (cf. pg.280 below).
HAT 2 For the purpose of the Humour Appreciation Test, a
relatively large early part of the film was treated as one section,
since the theme of 'sex' features quite prominently throughout these
30 or so minutes.
After a short opening sequence in which six fish (in an aquarium
and each with an individual Python face and matching voice) greet
each other and begin to speculate about "what's it all about ...",
an animated title sequence explodes onto the screen. Eric Idle's
rendition of the title song (complete with mock French accent and
mock existential angst) is accompanied by a Gilliam animation
encompassing conception, birth and carbon-copy socialisation. The
style of the animation is similar to that of the original TV series,
but more grandiose (Gilliam must have enjoyed himself with this).
A first intertitle then takes us into 'Part I: The Miracle of
Birth'. In a clean and shiny hospital, doctors/gynaecologists John
Cleese and Graham Chapman, with the help of some expensive-looking
technology and chief administrator Michael Palin, 'deliver' a baby.
The dehumanisation of the process and the marginalisation of the
mother are clear themes here. We are quickly into 'The Miracle of
Birth Part II: The Third World'.
This longer subsection is in two parts. First, Yorkshire
mill-worker Michael Palin, newly destitute, arrives home to inform
the seventy or so children of the family that he has to sell them
all for scientific experiments. To explain how/why such a large
number of children have accumulated, he (and wife Terry Jones) go
into the 'Sperm Song', which has the refrain 'Every sperm is
sacred': a hymn to Catholic refusal of contraception/ The song is
taken up by the children, and the scene shifts outdoors, with the
entire neighbourhood (including many nuns) taking part in a song-
and-dance extravaganza which ends on a suitably expansive crescendo.
Back indoors, the children make one or two suggestions as to how
their father's potency could be terminated, but the sequence ends
with his confirming his sorry decision.
This first part is linked to the second as Protestants Mr. and
Mrs. Blackitt (Graham Chapman and Eric Idle) watch the now disconso-
late children filing out of their home, from a house across the
road. Mr. Blackitt embarks on an anti-Catholic diatribe and sets up
a definition of Protestantism couched entirely in terms of the
freedom to wear a condom. His zeal leads him to describe with
enthusiasm the kinds of sheaths he could buy from the local chemist
- 274 -
(if he wanted to). The rigid repression of sexual drives is made
more explicit by the surprised (and increasingly lustful) comments
of Mrs. Blackitt.
At one point in his discourse Mr. Blackitt refers to Martin
Luther:
"When Martin Luther nailed his protest up to the church door
in 1517, he may not have realized the full significance of
what he was doing. But four hundred years later, thanks to
him ... I can wear whatever I want on my John Thomas."
In view of the significance of Luther in the development of modern
forms of psychic repression and anality, 12 this reference in the
film text is beguiling. It is particularly unfortunate, therefore,
(though in itself interesting) that the next section from the 'book
of the film' was entirely missing from the video version which we
used.
According to the book, there is no inter-title for this section;
the title 'The Adventures of Martin Luther' would have appeared as a
mock title-sequence ('in Reform-o-scope'). Following this, a
stereotypically Jewish couple (Mamie/Graham Chapman and Hymie/
Michael Palin) is visited by Martin Luther (Terry Jones). He is
intent of using "the john"(or pretends to be). There are some jokes
about food, constipation and excrement. When Luther realizes that
two daughters of the family are indoors, he redoubles his efforts to
get in, offering to do some cleaning, to be shown some cutlery
("Cutlery is really my thing now. Girls with round breasts is over
for me"). When he manages to talk his way indoors, the cutlery
(spoons) as displaced object of desire is gradually forgotten, and
finally he is permitted to get his hands, not on the daughters, but
on Mamie.
Whatever this absent sequence would have furnished in the way of
subject response in the interview sessions, it remains a fascinating
(knowing) piece of 'play' with the familiar elements of anality,
sexuality, displacement and religion.
An intertitle introduces us to Part II: 'Growth and Learning'.
At a boy's school chapel service, the chaplain, (Michael Palin)
leads the school in a parodic prayer, and the headteacher (John
Cleese) makes a short speech. A hymn ("Oh, Lord, please don't burn
us") then links the chapel to a classroom, where John Cleese pre-
sides over a lesson about sexual foreplay and intercourse, to which
the boys (among them Eric Idle, Graham Chapman, Terry Jones and
Michael Palin) react with characteristic indifference. Sexually
explicit descriptions are given and treated casually. An interest-
ing visual aid is produced when the blackboard is lowered to reveal
a four-poster bed, and John Cleese and wife (Mrs. Williams) proceed
to demonstrate sexual intercourse. The boys' interest remains
minimal, and eventually Biggs (Terry Jones) gets caught laughing
about something, and his punishment is to be selected for the boys'
rugby team which is to play against the masters.
HAT 3 A jump-cut takes us suddenly out of the classroom into
the conflict of a one-sided rugby match (which, curiously, is
represented in the book of the film only by a double-page photograph
uncharacteristic of the sequence). The watching 'masters' gleefully
celebrate the brutal mauling administered by their side. In terms
- 276 -
of the sort of comedicity being introduced here, this sequence
clearly belongs with Part III: 'Fighting Each Other', which then
arrives with the ellipsis of Biggs/Terry Jones covering his eyes in
the despair of mudstained humiliation and uncovering them to find
himself still mudstained but amidst the serious violence of trench
warfare.
In the sequence which follows, Biggs and five soldiers under his
command (played by most of the rest of the Python team) are under
fire and about to make a run from their scant cover. "In case we
don't meet again", the devoted soldiers, oblivious to the exposed
position, produce a series of presents and a card for their beloved
leader. When they discover they've left the cheque in another
trench and suggest going back to get it, Biggs' reaction is "forget
it, man". At this, the men turn against Biggs, threaten not to give
him the cake they have baked, and expose the class rift between
officers and men. When two of the men have been hit by passing
bullets, Biggs relents and decides they must eat the cake then and
there. As preparations for the party get under way, all the sol-
diers are more or less seriously injured, the camera pulls away to
show Biggs struggling to get the cake onto a table amid the noise
and smoke of warfare, and the sequence is interrupted by a General
(Graham Chapman) who reveals that this was a film which he was
projecting. There follows a periodic "Why we need an army" sketch,
and a sequence in which sergeant-major Michael Palin, having asked a
squad of recruits what they would rather be doing than marching up
and down the square, eventually finds himself marching up and down
the square alone.
The next section is set up as an illustration of the "calm
leadership of the upper class" in war. While the fighting and
bloodshed of "the Zulu War" rage around, officers John Cleese and
Michael Palin and army doctor Graham Chapman have their own problem:
colleague Eric Idle has a troublesome mosquito bite. The doctor
tries to reassure him, but it is eventually decided that a search
party should leave to search for Idle's missing leg (the fighting
has stopped by now, the British as well as the Zulus having sus-
tained heavy and ghastly casualties). It has become obvious that a
tiger has run away with the leg, and indeed before long the search
party believe they have found their quarry. This, however, turns
out to be not a real tiger but Eric Idle and Michael Palin as front
and rear ends of a tiger-costume. After a discussion about how they
came to be hiding in the jungle in their costume, and about where
officer Idle's leg may be, the section is brought to a close by
Terry Gilliam, who first appears encased in an 'African native'
carapace, then removes it to reveal himself as a white dinner-
jacketed announcer, and welcomes us to the Middle of the Film.
HAT 4 This HAT section is a perhaps uneasy mixture of the
absurd and the gruesome. First a 'Lady TV Presenter' (Michael
Palin) introduces the 'Middle of the Film', which is to be a game of
'Find the fish'. While the sound-track is a nonsense-doggerell
verse ("I wonder where that fish has gone ... It went wherever I
did go ... It is a most elusive fish ..."), the camera tracks in
through the doors of a large mansion; inside we are further exhorted
to find the fish while Terry Jones (as a bizarre waiter with false
arms and painted whiskers), Graham Chapman (in bizarre fetishistic
drag and a red wig) and someone else (with a rubber elephant's head
- 278 -
and outsize hands and feet) parade before us. The interior looks
like an ornate power station, filmed with the help of some disorien-
tating/distorting lenses.
We return at this point to the six fish we met at the start of
the film. They are very enthusiastic about the 'Find the Fish'
section, but then express doubts as to whether the film is in fact
going to deal with the Meaning of Life at all.
In Part IV: 'Middle Age', Mr. and Mrs. Hendy (Michael Palin and
Eric Idle) are an American couple (of a predictably awful kind) who
visit a 'Super Inn' hotel restaurant, with genuine Hawaiian food
served in an authentic English mediaeval dungeon atmosphere. A
sequence in which a waitress takes their order was missing from the
video version which we used. This seems odd since even if the
waitress' parting "Have a nice fuck" and the reference to "Super
Inn Skins" were deemed censorable, there seems to be no good reason
for removing the rest of the scene.
The rest of the sequence involves a waiter (John Cleese) trying
to start the couple off on a conversation, and the couple's failure
to get to grips with a conversation about the Meaning of Life.
Eventually the waiter suggests a conversation which is not on the
menu: Live Organ Transplants.
Part V of Meaning of Life is 'Live Organ Transplants'. On the
pretext that Mr. Bloke (Terry Gilliam) has a liver donor's card, two
men (not doctors) (John Cleese and Graham Chapman) force their way
into the Bloke family's home and proceed to remove his liver. As we
- 279 -
see blood flying everywhere and various internal organs being
removed (and put back?), Mrs. Bloke (Terry Jones) enters and dis-
cusses the matter with the two men. She offers them a cup of tea
and John Cleese goes with her to the kitchen ("I thought she'd never
askl"). Here he proposes that they could also take her liver. When
she appears rather hesitant, John Cleese opens the fridge to reveal
a debonair Eric Idle. The latter goes for a walk with Mrs. Bloke
around the stars and sings a 'magnitude of the universe' song. This
includes an animated graphics sequence showing an archetypal woman
conceiving and giving birth. Back in the kitchen, the 'distin-
guished vocalist' returns to the fridge and Mrs. Bloke, convinced of
her cosmic insignificance, agrees that the two men can have her
liver.
HAT 5 The next HAT section is made up of two parts, though its
comedic interest resides predominantly in the excrementality of the
second part.
First we attend part of a meeting of the 'Very Big Corporation
of America'. As we have noted (pp.272-273 above), it is as an
interruption to this meeting that the 'Crimson Permanent Assurance'
section was probably first conceived. In the version which we used,
however, the meeting is interrupted by an attack from the said
Assurance company, 13 but after a short fight sequence there is an
announcer-voice apology for this invasion by the supporting feature,
and the pirates' ship is flattened by a falling skyscraper.
An intertitle then introduces Part VI: 'The Autumn Years'. In a
posh restaurant, 'not Noel Coward' (Eric Idle) sings the 'Penis
- 280 -
Song', much to the genteel pleasure of the 'sophisticated' audience.
Then, to the great consternation of the fish, Mr. Creosote (Terry
Jones) arrives. He is more than grotesquely overweight. As the
Maitre D (John Cleese) takes his order, he vomits several times,
into a bucket, onto a cleaning-woman and onto the menu. Eventually
the unperturbable head waiter has his (gross) order. A cut takes us
to the end of the meal; Mr. Creosote, with a table full of stacks of
plates, a battery of bottles, and other assorted debris before him,
is visibly full. John Cleese coaxes him into having one wafer-thin
after-dinner mint. Mr. Creosote explodes, and his meal, together
with some internal organs, is graphically deposited over the sur-
rounding tables and customers. As the distressed customers flee,
retching, from the room, John Cleese calmly approaches the eviscer-
ated Mr. Creosote (still sitting on his chair) with the bill.
HAT 6 An intertitle introduces Part VIB: 'The Meaning of Life'.
In the aftermath of Mr. Creosote's fragmentary departure, the
restaurant staff are clearing up the mess. Mattre D (John Cleese)
listens as the cleaning-woman (Terry Jones) recites a rhyming
description of (her) jobs in various well-known libraries, museums
etc. When (she) ends on "At least I don't work for Jews", John
Cleese empties a bucket of vomit over (her) head. Then, as he
insists that he can explain, the camera pans away and seeks out a
waiter (Eric Idle) who is pensively smoking a cigarette. With
stereotypical French accent, he offers to show us something, and
leads the camera crew out of the restaurant, through the town and
into the countryside. Sheepishly he shows us the place where he was
born, and explains the philosophy of love which his mother incul-
cated in him. "And so ... I became a waiter." After a lengthy
- 281 -
pause during which he smiles and nods at the camera with growing
unease, he walks off angrily: "... it's not much of a philosophy, I
know ... but ... well ... fuck you ... don't come following me"
An intertitle then precedes the final section of the film: Part
VII: 'Death'. First, in a brief piece of (minimal) animation, we
see an autumn tree: a male voice (suitably distraught) decides it's
all too much, it has to be suicide. A scream is heard as a single
leaf falls. The process is repeated with a female voice, then with
the two orphaned children. Four leaves lie on the ground. After a
pause which is neither short nor long, every leaf on the tree
crashes to the ground with one accord.
There is a rapid cut to a man (Graham Chapman) running wildly
through/among disused warehouses, to a chase-music track. Through-
out the sequence which follows, the editing is that of a typical
chase. A dramatic male voice tells us that this man is about to
die; we learn that, having been convicted of making gratuitous
sexist jokes in a moving picture, he has chosen to die while being
chased by twelve topless (attractive) young women (who are also
wearing crash-helmets and knee- and elbow-padding). The chase,
during which one slow-motion shot focuses on the womens' breasts, is
intercut with Michael Palin and a group of the man's relatives/
friends standing solemnly round a grave on a beach at the foot of a
cliff. As the chase reaches a peak of excitement, the man plunges
over the cliff and plummets neatly into his grave.
There is a cut to an evocative sequence of the Grim Reaper
waiting in a bleak landscape. The book of the film points out that
-282 -
"Ingmar Bergman now takes over the direction of the film". The Grim
Reaper (a completely concealed John Cleese), alias 'Death', arrives
at an isolated house where a dinner party is going on. All the
other Pythons are present, Terry Jones, Michael Palin, Eric Idle in
drag (suavely, even attractively so). No-one in the group under-
stands who the cloaked figure is, or why he is there. It requires
some time, and a deal of argument for him to convince them that they
are dead and that he has come to take them away. Eventually he
succeeds in leading their spiritual forms out of the house. He is
slightly surprised when they get into their cars, but lets them use
this means of transport to follow him up through the skies to
heaven. Here the Grim Reaper disappears and the new arrivals are
left to their own devices.
In this heaven, the reception area of which is the same as that
of the 'Super Inn' restaurant of an earlier sequence, characters
from the rest of the film are assembled. A lavish song-and-dance
number "It's Christmas in Heaven", with Graham Chapman as 'not Tony
Bennett', is performed, intercut with brief TV-musical skits.
Suddenly, before the number can end, the image and sound are
abruptly cut, and the camera pulls back to reveal a TV set which has
just been switched off, beneath the caption 'The End of the Film'.
The 'Lady Presenter' of the Middle of the Film informs us that this
is the end of the film, and opens an envelope to read out the secret
of the meaning of life. This turns out to be "Try to be nice to
people, avoid eating fat, read a good book every now and then, get
some walking in and live together in harmony with people of all
creeds and nations." With some tart comments about the perverted
tastes of the video-sated public, "where's the fun in pictures?",
- 283 -
(she) bids us goodnight. The credits roll to a reprise of the
'magnitude of the universe' song, and end with a caption thanking
all the fish who have taken part and exhorting all fish to strive
for a more peaceful coexistence with other fish.
At the end of the film, the TV monitor was switched off and the
HAT sheets collected. Before any conversation/comments could ensue,
a second MACL, identical to the first, was administered.
The subjects were then offered another glass of wine or fruit
juice, and the audio tape-recorder was turned on. The semi-
structured discussion which followed was recorded. After the first
two sessions it seemed that 45 minutes would be an adequate discus-
sion period, but when two groups later continued enthusiastically
beyond this time, no attempt was made to curtail the session.
6.4 Modes of Analysis
Before proceeding to a more detailed account of the analysis and
interpretation of the empirical data, it may be appropriate to
comment on how and why the analysis took the form it did.14
Throughout the planning and development of the research mate-
rial, the original impulse to find some way of quantifying psycho-
analytically relevant data was retained. It soon became clear,
however, that the questionnaires could not provide an adequate base
for any quantitative study of the responses elicited in discussion.
It was therefore decided that the emphasis should be placed on
the descriptive mode favoured by David Morley and by Janice Radway,
among others, with respondents' comments, explications or opinions
taking centre stage. The open-interview format, constrained only by
occasional refocussing where discussion faltered or veered off
elsewhere, was thus confirmed as the most suitable mode for gleaning
subject response.15
During the transcription of the interview tapes it became clear
that there were a number of strands running unevenly through the
discussions, mirroring, echoing and contradicting one another, and
emerging more or less strongly at various points. The decision was
taken to take each 'strand' in turn and to look at how it was
handled by the different subjects/groups.
The more quantifiable MACL and HAT findings, together with some
data from the questionnaires, could then subsequently be interro-
gated in the light of such an analysis of the interview-transcripts.
6.5 Analysis of tape transcripts
a) Interpretive communities, viewing contexts and cultural 
capital 
At various points throughout the interviews - sometimes in
responding to a direct question, sometimes more or less 'sponta-
neously' - the respondents commented on the level of intellectual
and other sophistication needed for appreciating Monty Python, and
on the groups (interpretive communities) which would have access to
such cultural capital. It is not possible to develop an adequate
- 285 -
index of cultural capital here; 18 since, however a number of the
respondents refer in the discussions to their own experiences, some
of the biographical data from the questionnaires may be useful in
furnishing a profile to give us some access to the cultural mappings
of individual respondents (cf. Fig.7).17
The need for shared assumptions, needs, sense of humour etc. by
an 'interpretive community' was identified by a number of respon-
dents, many of whom remembered the role of the TV Monty Python
series of 1969-74 in their social lives. Thus
"... you've got to be attuned to that kind of humour to begin
with ..." (L13,71)18
"... it's just you know, taste in humour is, certain people
like certain things and not others; but also if you're in a
peer-group, you know that you're all in tune to what your
humour is, so there are things that you can work off each
other, but if you're ... just with people you don't know
very well, sometimes things that would be funny somewhere
else just don't ... work, because of peoples' attitudes
towards humour ..." (L6,91). (cf. also L12,113)
The shared cultural capital of such interpretive groupings was
also identified. There was much discussion of the 'filmic refer-
ences' employed in Meaning of Life;
"... it you are a movie buff you enjoy it even more than
someone who doesn't go very often to the cinema ..."
(L16,68)
The pleasures of recognition were overlaid by the satisfaction of
belonging to a privileged interpretive group, though distinctions
could also be made within that group. Thus one respondent, in
recalling the 'cult' status of Monty Python's Flying Circus.:
Fig.7a Some cultural-capital indicators for respondents taking part in screenings/interviews.
resp.
gender age
group
first
language
other
language
ethnic
descriptor
formal
education
parents'
occupation
H1 'F 30-39 German English
(French)
white grammar-school,
university
teacher-training
m: housewife
f: owner small
factory
55 F 20-29 English (German) white comprehensive
school
m: mail-order clerk
f: unemployed
m: office worker
f: carpenter
57 M 20-29 English - white secondary modern
4 years art college
511 M 30-39 English (French) white grammar-school,
part-time f.e. coil
m: housewife
f: process operator
513 M 40-49 English - white grammar-school,
poly, further
degree(s)
accountant
L5 M 20-29 English French white comprehensive,
grammar school,
university PGCE
security guard
L6 M 20-29 English - Jewish university
degree
m: housewife,
part-time retail
f: glass/pottery
retail
L10 M 20-29 English - white secondary modern teaching
L12 F 30-39 English French white f.e. coll. poly m: housewife
f: local goverment
L13 M 30-39 English - white comprehensive
university further
degree
f: in 'forces' then
teaching
L14 F 40-49 English - white university degree
(Part-time)
teacher and civil
servant
L16 M 40-49 (French) English white secondary modern
f.e. coll.
L17 F 30-39 English (French) white grammar-school,
university degree
f: marine engineering
consultant
L21 M < 20 English (Spanish)
(German)
white comprehensive m: runs antique shop
f: manages travel
agency
L22 M 20-29 English - white
Lithuanian
public school
f.e./h.e. college
m: actor
f: theatre director
L23 M 30-39 English - white MSc university teacher
secondary teacher
Fig. 7b Some cultural-capital indicators for respondents taking part in screenings/interviews.
rasp.
occupation
newspaper(s)
preferred
daily
access
daily
access
video I
hrs/day
cinema-
going
main interests
and pastimes
H1 teaching
adults
Frankfurt
Rundschau
V J 1-2 rare reading, knitting, films,
plants, travelling, talking
with friends
55 instructor
at day-
centre
Daily Mail
(Today)
V J virtual
rare socialising, records, films,
theatre, keep fit, reading
57 instructor
centre
locals
(Daily
Express,
Mail)
V X 1-2 rare motorcycling, draw/painting,
photography, socialising
1111 engineer Guardian
Observer
(Today)
J V virtual
rare painting, goat-keeping, model-
engineering, walking
H13 art
teacher
Guardian
Sunday Times
(Sun, Mirror,
Telegraph)
J X 2-3 rare gardening, walking, reading,
photography
L5 English Guardian
Mirror
London
Daily News
I V 1-2 rare cinema, music, sport
L6 ophthalmic
optician
Guardian
Observer
J I 2-3 1/week films, records, DJing,
photography, bars and
night-clubs
L10 marketing Guardian
Observer
locals
J V 1-2 1/week films, photography, walking
L12 editing
film/TV
study
material
Guardian
Observer
J I 2-3 rare reading, tap-dance, music,
singing, guitar, gardening,
film/TV, theatre, cooking cakes
L13 hostel
warden,
writer for
media
press
Guardian
(Independent)
Times
Standard
V V 1-2 1-2/
films, eating out, guitar, music
L14 library Guardian
Observer
(Times)
(Independent)
V V 1-2 1/week painting, writing, film-making
and viewing, music, theatre,
canals, eating out, pubs
L16 accountant Guardian
Observer
London
Daily News
I X 3-4
none)
1. cinema, 2. travelling,
walking, reading, theatre,
museum, friends, good restaurant
L17 magazine
journalist
Guardian
Independent
Standard
News of
the World
i X 1 2/week cinema, theatre, travel, drama
workshops, appear in revues,
reading biographies
L21 school
student
Standard
Sunday
Express
(Guardian)
London
Daily News
1 2-3 1-2/
sport, collect medals, records,
horror film material (press,
stills, posters)
L22 freelance
carpenter
furniture
maker
Guardian
Observer
News of
the World
V V 3-4 1/week cinema, reading
L23 systems
programmer
Guardian
Observer
News on
Sunday
X X none 3/week reading, films, swimming
"... at college (there) used to be a cult thing, but the cult
obviously widened, ... we used to sit and watch it in the
students' Union building, and like five hundred people
watching it, and it was very interesting to Bee what bits
people laughed at ... and some of the very obvious jokes,
like sort of, anal humour type things, there were people
that would be ... , literally sort of rolling on the floor;
but some of them didn't understand the more subtle intellec-
tual type things ... , that became the cult of the cult, ...
do you remember the Jean-Paul Sartre sketch, the laundry,
and then there's Mrs. Cardboard Cut-out ... which I think is
hilariously funny ..." (L12,106-107)
A level of intellectual sophistication was seen as necessary for
'understanding' some of the sketches.
". .. you just need to know who he is, that he's French, and
that he was a philosopher, and he was sixty years trying to
find out if he was free or not ... if you don't know that,
you can't laugh at that joke, it means nothing ..."
(L12,107)
Indeed one respondent, speculating about the obviously contrived
'structure' of Meaning of Life:
"I mean, it's so blatant ... if they're expecting people to
understand their philosophical references, I'm sure they
expected people to realize that it is cobbled together, and
it's just a joke, I mean it's so obviously done, that they
must know that the person who understands the references to
xyz philosophers can say ... God ... they're just taking the
piss ..."(L5,108)
and playfully identified this as a marketing device:
"... I suppose it might have been a ... marketing ploy
.../... to get everybody in, and 	 , part of the running
joke was the fact that these sketches were just so ridicu-
lously, the connections were so tenuous between the title
and what the sketch was about, I mean that was part of the
joke ..."(L5,108-109)
The same respondent, however, was also one of at least four for
whom Monty Python was (or had become) somewhat childish, the humour
clearly the product of a pampered Oxbridge mafia. While it was
generally agreed that the audience for the original TV series and
for the films had been 'young', the ageing of that original audience
- 289 -
clearly poses problems as regards its 'faithfulness' to a previous
more youthful enthusiasm for Monty Python. The following view met
with agreement from L22 and L23:
"... that scene with the fish thing, when they were talking
about 'where's the fish?', ... that's the sort of Monty
Python that I remember from the television series, and yet
it was, ... I just thought it was rubbish .../... I hadn't
thought about that in terms of the television programmes
before, but ... , it almost seemed to me to be very school-
boyish sort of humour, and I didn't really like that bit at
all, it wasn't very good ..."(L6,82)
Individual comedic preferences change with time, and more than one
respondent felt that Monty Python had not kept pace:
"... I remember watching it when I was young, it was ... like
a treat, but it was quite a naughty thing to watch, 'cos it
was on BO late Sunday nights as I remember it, when it first
started .../... and it was, please, can I stay up late, used
to have to beg to be allowed to watch it, ... and it was
really funny then and I went through, ... the grammar
schools as it happens, and it was very funny; all through
school, kids learning sketches off by heart, the parrot
sketch; and it was very funny But ... , they didn't seem
to have moved on at all, they seemed to be, ... , using past
glories, sort of trying to push ..."(L5,94)
This impression was reinforced by the same respondent's description
of "Cambridge boys being really clever"(L5,99) and again in a later
identification of the tenuousness of the 'intellectual' content: L5
first questioned L12's valorisation of 'intellectual' references in
Monty Python, then made this distinction:
"... it's satire of quite a ... reasonably high knowledge-
level, not necessarily intellectual ..."(L5,107)
In our limited sample, then, a number of subjects identified
themselves as having first watched Monty Python on TV as members of
particular interpretive groups, typically schoolchildren and stu-
dents. The group-cohesive activity of rote learning of sketches was
described a number of times, for example as a "club of Monty Python
fans"(H5).
- 290 -
For a minority of respondents, however, a liking for Monty
Python had grown later, from a relative indifference to the original
TV series. H5 and H7 were among those who showed the most visible
signs of enjoying Meaning of Life, yet H7 was not initially very
amused; he could
"... remember being fascinated by them; ... it was totally
different from any other sort of childlike humour on TV at
the time,	 I suppose over the years I must have seen
quite a bit of the old series, 'cos they've been repeated
.../... when I started secondary school I had a group of
friends that used to sit and recite things parrot-fashion,
which after a while took the edge off, the funny edge off
... I can remember just being amazed ... I wasn't rolling
about on the floor ... I was thinking, crikeyl really dif-
ferent ..."(H7,20)
We shall return to other observations about the relation between
novelty and funniness below, but it is interesting that for this
subject amusement did develop:
"I'd certainly appreciate it more now than I did when I was
younger ... I liked it ... but I found it perhaps fascinat-
ing when I was younger .../... I find it a lot more humorous
and enjoyable (on the whole) now ..."(H7,22)
This respondent thus seemed to distance himself a little from the
more 'typical' accounts, and this was reinforced by his view of the
Monty Python audience, delivered after a particularly long pause.
"Maybe a fairly wide group of people but for different rea-
sons, ... it's not like certain comedy series that you know
will be the same all the way through ... I mean it will
always be slightly different and ... wacky, way out, or
whatever, but things will be, varied every week, it won't be
like a sitcom ... it won't be like Benny Hill, where you
know the jokes are going to be roughly the same every week,
it won't be that 'sort of things, so I suppose it could
appeal to a wider variety of people at different times ...
all those people would sit down and watch it all at once, to
get their one little bit out of it all at the same time, ...
I don't think you can just say it'll be just those sort of
people who'll like it ..."(H7,20)
Was this respondent undervaluing the 'intellectual' component, or
were some others overvaluing it? In any case, this particular
respondent is clear about how the interpretive community for Monty
Python has extended over the years:
"I think now, because of the time-span that it's been on,
there's obviously a wider age-group of people that appreci-
ate it now, but at the time, maybe that age-group was a lot
slimmer ..."(H7,22)
A more radical example of self-distancing in relation to the
Monty Python audience was provided by the youngest respondent, who
was about to take A-levels at school.
"It'd be type-casting myself as a certain person ... 'cos
whatever I say, in generalising as a Monty Python fan, I
would have to be careful that ... it's the opposite of me
'COB I wouldn't class myself as a Monty Python fan, but
what I would class as a typical Monty Python fan, I would
see as being different to myself ... yes, the typical Monty
Python fan ... he would enjoy sort of alternative humour ...
which is a sort of label term ... possibly rebellious
against society ... possibly someone who ... who has
restricted himself, restricted their emotions, and can find
outlets through the kind of humour that Monty Python depicts
..."(L21,39)
The "restricted emotions" will be on interest below, particularly in
view of the striking refusal to identify with an interpretive
community; we are reminded of the parallel pointed out by Pierre
Bourdieu and by Klaus Theweleit between the bourgeois use of lin-
guistic distinction and the bourgeois relation to the body.
In keeping with the characterisation of the typical Monty Python
audience as young/student, .a number of the students recalled more or
less serious disagreements with elders/parents. Thus
"I can remember watching that with ... my friend who was the
son of the local vicar ... I remember his father getting up
and turning it off because he was so pissed off with it ..."
(L13,69)
.. I was at home with my family last Saturday, and I know
that my mother doesn't find it very funny, though she's got
a very good sense of humour, we can giggle like two school-
girls together, and she's seventy, ... but she doesn't
- 292 -
understand, ... the poking fun at establishment type jokes
.../... but you've still got to be probably below a certain
age to appreciate that, below whatever age they are, mid-
forties, probably, because there's a real kind of generation
gap there, ..."(L12,106)
The common experience of an older generation's rejection/incomp-
rehension of 'new', 'different' taboo-breaking material was to some
extent replicated. The example
"... I remember watching it when I was young, it was almost
like a treat, but it was quite a naughty thing to watch,
'cos it was on so late Sunday nights as I remember it, ...
and it was please, can I stay up late, you used to have to
beg to be allowed to watch it, because my big brother
watched it ..."(L5,94)
however, contains an odd ambiguity (a signifying absence?) about the
actual parental response. Were the parents also enjoying the
'naughtiness', or were they part of its butt? In the case of one of
the youngest respondents, parents appreciated the original TV series
and the daughter ("I've always wanted to be older than I was ...")
identified with their cultural norms rather than those of her wider
peer-group.
"... when I got into it I was ... in second or third year at
junior school, and me and my friend got into it and a few of
the friends at school, but ... it certainly seemed a more
adult humour because we played it in junior school once ...
and the teacher found it really funny ... I think it was
five of us who found it really funny, and all the other ...
classroom of kids were looking blankly; they couldn't under-
stand it, it sort of went right over their heads, and there
was just like our little crowd really laughing, and the
teacher really finding it funny, ... I suppose I found it
was normally people older than me at the time, when I was at
junior school, ... only a minority of people my age liked
it, it was more older people; perhaps that's what attracted
it to me as well ... 'cos it was older people, ... my dad
enjoyed it, and my mum enjoyed it, and my sister ... and I
found it funny, so it made me feel perhaps a bit more grown
up ... "(H5,21)
Though this last is an isolated example, it highlights the need,
in accounting for the development of individual viewing tastes/
preferences, for close attention to the cultural capital made
- 293 -
available in the home. Interpretive communities may be forged by
exposure to formal education and by the exigencies of working and
social relationships, but their foundations are surely often secured
in the earlier years at home.
b) Comedic forms and functions
In Section 2 above we addressed the distinctions between jokes
and the comic, and we looked at the social and psychoanalytic
functions that different forms of comedicity could fulfil. In
discussion with the respondents, the joke/'comic' distinction proved
very difficult to elucidate; subjects were more at home with the
social/psychological effectivity of humour. At this point we shall
try to restrict ourselves to the more general comments on form and
function, leaving specific pleasures and the function of particular
areas of comedicity (e.g. the excremental) until later.
b) (i) general observations on comedic forms
The distinction between 'jokes' and 'the comic' and whether a
film such as Meaning of Life could usefully be discussed in such
terms (Jean-Paul Simon's film-esprit and film-comique) was not
really taken up by most respondents, though two comments were made
about the relative absence of jokes:
"... I was thinking I wish they'd have a few one-liners ...
the individual lines just aren't quite funny enough ..."
(L17,25)
and, in talking about the slowness of the 'Zulu War' sketch:
"... I want to see what's happened to his leg ... whereas if
you'd put a ... huge jokes in there, you wouldn't give a sod
about the leg, would you ..."(H13,50)
- 294 -
L21 initially answered the question "What do you think of as 'jokes'
in a film - in Meaning of Life" with
"... there wasn't really that much I would have ... I imag-
ined it to be funny when I first saw it, but seeing it this
time there wasn't really that much I was exceptionally funny
..."(L21,36)
When we returned to the question, his response was
"... in a comedy film I wouldn't say so much a joke, it's
more visual, in a film; if you ... watch something like Sat-
urday Live, ... then that's when I would say, more the
actual spoken joke would be more funny, but in a film I'd
say 99% it's more visual ... it wouldn't really be a film if
it was just ... bloke reading off jokes here and there
..."(L21,36)
and, shortly after this,
"... if you think about lines, I suppose that one that will
probably be more vivid would probably be the 'Fighting Each
Other', ... they're being killed off one by one, and he's
asking them to go and get ... things, and that's where the
actual spoken joke I think was more funny, although the pre-
senting of the clocks, the visual joke, was also funny ..."
(L21,37)
Though this respondent also later referred to a preference for the
one-liners and 'visual humour' of Only Fools and Horses, it was not
possible to define the 'visual joke' with any precision.
There were some (unprompted) references to sequences of the film
as extended 'jokes'. Thus for one respondent the 'Grim Reaper'
sequence was "a but unsubtle ... the one joke went on ..."(L17,26),
and L16 repeatedly used "it's a joke" to describe particular moments
in the film. We have also already noted L5's comment on the artifi-
cial structure of the film: "it's a joke"(L5,108). In fact this was
the one respondent who attempted to define a joke: after asking
"What does a joke entail?" and encountering a long pause, I had
'joked', "You're not going until you've told me" While I was
working towards a Freudian definition of a joke, L5 maintained that
my comment was a joke:
"I mean you're taking ... the unexpected, taking a situation,
and giving it an apparent context, and suddenly you change
it ... I'd have said it was a joke ..."(L5,110)
This formulation fits well in the 'incongruity' category (cf. pp.
69-70 above) and indeed recalls Koestler's 'bisociation' model.
One respondent picked up an important aspect of the conventional
joke-telling situation.
"... it's a two-way process ... someone can tell me a fairly
indifferent joke and I will kind of laugh at it because ...
it will be more infectiously funny, even though it actually
isn't very funny ..."(L13,78)
Though the other one present continued with
"Michael Palin is talking at the end, you know ... there's
nothing visual, he's saying something ... it makes you
laugh, ... that's a kind of joke, OK we see him but there's
no equivalent on the screen of the joke, ... he is only say-
ing something ... or like when they are all like fishes
inside the aquarium ..."(L16,78)
we did not get any further with this idea.
One group (L5, L12, L14 - and especially the first two) made a
number of interesting comments about the 'joke' question. At one
point they embarked on an animated discussion of gender and power
structures in relation to humour and joking.
"... I'm not quite sure why ... but I suspect there's a
strongly misogynist' thread that runs through all that; and I
find I have to step back from it to laugh ... I do find them
funny ..."(L14)
"... don't you think there is in a lot of humour anyway?
because humour is male and mainstream?"(L12)
"Oh yes, I was just going to say ... all of this is really
from a masculine point of view .../... the one we were
watching here, we're seeing a man's point of view again ..."
(L14,102)
- 296 -
It is odd that this respondent (L14), having introduced this subject
so succinctly, subsequently said so little on the matter. When the
group later got 'stuck' on the question of the joke/comic distinc-
tion, I delivered a short monologue on the Freudian model (chorus of
L5, L12, L14: "What does Freud say?"). 19 The group immediately
returned to the 'masculinist bias' of joking:
"But there is a kind of ... psychological cathartic release,
isn't there, as you may not be able to say directly what
you'd like to say, and therefore it's kind of disguised, ...
displaced ... but, Freud, classic, you know, always from the
male point of view ... in the last few years, women have now
found their voice publicly, in terms of being able to tell
jokes; because it was always a sort of male myth ... that
women didn't have a sense of humour; they weren't allowed to
because they always had to be the butts of male jokes."
(L12,110)
and identified as positive the emergence of women comedians such as
Victoria Wood, laughing and poking fun at men.
"... the thing is that the woman is in the actual active
position rather than the passive recipient, ... it's
reversed ..."(L12,111)
When I suggested that "poking fun at" or "laughing at" may
correspond more to Freud's 'comic' than to 'joking', the problem of
distinguishing between the two modes in a film seemed insuperable
and the discussion took another turn. A rather essentialist view of
humour was taken up by at least two of the group:
"... we're saying ... that there are certain elements in
humour that are there, and will always be there, and that's
the human condition, you will always laugh when you're trig-
gered off by one of those elements, ... it doesn't matter if
you go back forty years or back to Hogarth or whatever,
there are certain things that people perennially, univer-
sally will find funny ..."(L12,114)
One disquisition from this very articulate (and talkative)
subject can stand as a paradigm of the more or less untheorised
- 297 -
refusal of the 'joke' as having any place in Meaning of Life.
"... when we talk about humour I don't think of jokes, I
don't think jokes are particularly funny ... if I try and
remember them, I tend to get the punchlines wrong, or some-
thing, ruined it; ... it's the situations that arise from
real life that are funnier; it's the ironies and the expec-
tations that aren't met, are undercut, which I think are
funnier ... the sketches aren't really, based around a joke,
are they? It's not stand-up comic joke thing; it's a kind
of observation of life: look, this is how it is, and if you
just slip that down a bit ... it's something else again ...
isn't it absurd, isn't life absurd? And I think it's hilar-
iously funny, ... suddenly the carpet's pulled from under-
neath them, there's this big hole in the floor, ... it's
that idea, metaphorically speaking ... that the outcome
isn't what they thought, while we ... often have prior
knowledge ... knowledge that they don't have, and we can
laugh at their expense ... But there's also ... visual
humour, ... like in the Tiger sketch, when Eric Idle looked
down, there was this tiger's head which was kind of moving,
which was just visually funny ... and then there's the ver-
bal dexterity, there's all sorts of different things that
are funnyl"(L12,109)
b) (ii) the role of exaggeration
"It is the too much ... not the 'much', that is funny" .20
We must first note that where exaggeration is used in any area
such as 'sex' or 'violence' which may provoke latent anxiety in a
subject, it is likely to reduce the effectiveness of the humour.
This will preoccupy us more later, but we can already refer to two
examples in which respondents did not appreciate exaggerative
representation in Meaning of Life in what may have been sensitive
areas. Thus one respondent referred to the sex-education sequence:
"... I think in the end that became funnier, I think almost
when she came on the bed it became maybe too explicit, not
the sex I meant too explicit, but the ..."(L5,97)
Another did not like the 'violence' of the war sequences, which were
"overdone":
"... it's absolutely unnecessary" (H1,5)
- 298 -
In general, however, there was agreement about the effectiveness
of exaggeration as a comedic device in Meaning of Life:
"... if anything, I think it usually enhances the joke"
(L21,42)
and indeed a number of respondents (approvingly) spoke of the film
itself as grossly exaggerative. L21's own
"most of the film was a gross exaggeration ..."(L21,43)
was echoed by a number of other comments, for example
"I think the fact that they, it goes over the top, somehow
makes it less ... horrific ..."(H13,49)
"... everything is over the top, you know, the blood coming
... and it's a joke ... that's the way I take it ..."
(L16,71)
There is a reference by a respondent who enjoyed the Mr. Creosote
sequence to
"... the fact ... nobody could ever be that sick ..."
(H7,18).21
It seems that the greater the exaggeration, the better.
Some respondents, however, were also concerned that excessive
exaggeration may be conterproductive. The phrase "over the top" was
sometimes used approvingly, but was also, to some, a cause for
concern:
"... as long as it doesn't go completely over the top and
kills the joke ..."(L21,42)
For a few respondents, the exaggeration of Mr. Creosote was too
much, compared with the birth-sequence or the sex-education lesson.
"There's a small leap for my imagination, to make; not so
much the number of kids, obviously, but ... in the sex-
education one ... it's the next step, you know ... some of
the jokes come from, whereas the exploding man, I don't know
..."(L17,29)
"... the bit that sticks in my mind is when they cut the
baby's umbilical cord, and this is exaggeration, right, but
- 299 -
it was so ... quick, and sharp ... exaggerated, but it
wasn't overexaggerated, it wasn't extended ... it was so
quick you could almost have missed it, but it was an exag-
geration and it worked ..."(L10,29)
For another viewer, drag impersonations of Northern working-class
women were not objectionable, because
"... it's not over the top ... the way that say, Les Dawson
is, or even Benny Hill ..."(L12,99)
Yet this can in turn be contrasted with another instance where a
respondent considers the possibility that over-the-top ('fore-
grounded') 'sexist' representations may themselves work against
sexism:
"It's a bit tricky, really, ... all through the Monty Python
you always had, the old ones with Carol Cleveland, she's
always like the busty sort of secretary, but she's so over
the top, it's almost taking the mickey of people who ... do
the sexist things ... it's sort of borderline ..."(H5,13)
The evaluation of exaggeration, then, can be tied to questions of
performance, timing, and perceived ideological 'correctness' 22 as
much as to notions of plausibility.
On the whole the respondents were disinclined to pursue the
question of understatement in relation to exaggeration. In view of
the potential of this line of enquiry in a psychoanalytic domain
(cf. pp.153-154 above) this was a disappointment. An analysis of
the (English?) predilection for mixing understatement and exagger-
ation, evoked by
"... these wonderful little memories of men exploding and so
forth ..."(H13,58)
will have to await another day.
b) (iii) laughter of superiority
There were relatively few allusions to this comedic mode, only 3
or 4 in all. Thus
".. we often have prior knowledge, we have knowledge that
they don't have, we can laugh at their expense ..."
(L12,109)
Slapstick was evoked only once, during a discussion of the 'clean-
ing-woman's punishment:
"... there's a lot of pleasure to be derived just from seeing
someone having, not necessarily a bucket of vomit, but a ...
bucket of any, paint or anything, emptied all over them ...
any simple slapstick style of comedy ..."(L13,77)
A single, slightly more revealing, instance of superior laughter
emerged in the same piece of discussion:
"... I can't help laughing in that scene because she is, ...
cleaning the floor and suddenly she is talking, she was at
the Prado and the British Museum and the Academie Fran.caise
and ... the waiter has got fed up ... and he put all this
... that's why I laugh, because ... she's just doing some
cheap philosophy ..."(L16,77)
The other reference to superiority occurred when one group was
talking about the 'cleverness' of the Monty Python team, and specu-
lating about the chase sequence near the end of the film in which a
man is pursued by a group of topless women:
... you don't know, you see ... is it just clever-clever,
two fingers up at you, mate, we're going to put these women
in anyway ... or not ..."(L5,98).
This group (and L5 in particular) was the only one which raised the
possibility of a cynically 'superior' component in the Monty Python
mode of mockery.
b) (iv) making funimickev-taking
This subsection and the next are considered separately insofar
that at various points during the interviews the 'social criticism'
of Meaning of Life was perceived as more or less playful. In the
next subsection we shall look at those comments which identified
Meaning of Life as a serious attack on the Establishment, but first
let us deal with 'ridicule' and 'ffackey-taking', which imply a more
playful position.23
Certainly the ludic appropriation of film conventions/genres
(for example the swashbuckling-musical in the Crimson Assurance
section) would be 'playful' rather than 'serious'; though even here
the conventions act as supports for quite deep cultural expecta-
tions. One respondent, both of whose parent worked in theatre, was
particularly interested in the Sperm song:
"... again, in the 'Every Sperm is Sacred', I'm thinking of
Oliver and I'm thinking of the musical genre, laughing at
the Bending-up of that ... That's predominantly why I found
it funny; the fact that they're singing (it) ..." L22,85)
This was followed by
"Any poking at religion is always good for a laugh with me"
(L23,85)
As we shall see later, many of the questionnaire returns indi-
cated that 'irreverence' was a highly appreciated aspect of Monty
Python humour. This was supported by
"... the first sketch, ... in the hospital, I really liked
that one, I thought it was very good; that had all the good
ingredients, sort of irreverence ... and just the way they
... ridiculed the system ..."(L6,84)
and by the large number of references to mickey-taking, poking fun,
- 302 -
etc. Indeed the slight shift from 'irreverence' to the more collo-
quial expressions now usually used seems to coincide with the
democratisation of morality, with the secularisation which has
continued to take place since the original Monty Python TV series.
Authority (and particularly religious authority) is perhaps now less
reverable anyway.
The mickey-taking was also identified by some respondents in
relation to a number of other 'objects'. One respondent described
how the topless-women-chasing-man sequence worked for her:
"... if they hadn't said that bit about what he's been sen-
tenced for; if he's been sentenced for robbing a bank or
something, then perhaps I would have thought, oh ... Benny
Hill again, sort of sexist stuff, but because they put that
in, he's been sentenced for gratuitous ... I didn't mind
that there were loads of naked women running across ... 'cos
then it was taking the mickey out of ... sexist things ..."
(H5,13)
For this respondent the drag representations of women were also
mitigated by the treatment of 'male' characters, for instance in the
'Protestant' scene, when Eric Idle as Mrs. Blackitt
"... makes him out to be a real twit ... taking the mickey
out of a bloke that could be like that ..."(H5,14)
Both the subjects in this interview (H5 and H7) agreed that a more
complex 'play' with sexual stereotyping tended to make the images
more acceptable/funny.
A number of respondents identified social institutions and
behaviours which the Monty Python team must have been ideally
equipped to mock. School and church surfaced several times (e.g.
L12,94). The salmon mousse in the 'Grim Reaper' sequence drew one
respondent's attention to
"... it's the politeness thing, ... taking the mickey out of
everyone being so polite ..."(H5,9)
Though there was one reference to
"... they're also taking the mickey out of the working-class
man, ..."(L12,99)
far more numerous were comments about ridiculing institutions
associated with the upper/middle classes, with the Establishment.
"... the main thrust of their humour always seemed to be
anti-establishment, ... always picking on the army and pub-
lic-school headmasters, figures of the Establishment ..."
(L12,99)
 ... they're always ridiculing the upper classes and yet
they, they come from that sort of well-educated system and
they're ridiculing it ..."(L6,90)
Yet, as the same respondent goes on to say, the credibility of
the mockery/attack may be undermined by the fact that the Python
team could not really be seen to break completely with the very
values they ridiculed.
".. even in ridiculing it they seem to adopt the same sort
of ... sexual attitudes ... that the system represents, like
what we see in Personal Services ... we all know about, ...
sort of judges in drag all the time, ... they're just still
in a way continuing that because ... they just found another
outlet, they can do it on telly instead; ... they're trying
to ridicule it as well, but they're reinforcing it as well
..."(L6,90)
This rejoins the comment of L5 about "clever Cambridge boys" having
fun, and is echoed by
"... they're always in an advantageous position, because they
would say 'oh we're debunking all this' ... and 'taking the
piss out of philosophy, we're taking the piss out of univer-
sity'; ... they've been there, they've done university
..."(L5,107)
Let us not assume, though, that it is impossible for individuals
to be critical of a system which feeds them well.
- 304 -
"... it's a question of intent, ... are they exposing it, or
are they just poking fun at it, or what ..."(L12,116)
Whether the question of intent is as important as that of how the
comedy is decoded, read, received, is another matter; L12's distinc-
tion nevertheless usefully takes us into the next set of responses.
b) (v) attack
One particular respondent, L21, repeatedly gave "attacking
conventions" as a principal reason for liking Monty Python. For
him, identifying and enjoying such "attacks" seemed to be something
of a preoccupation, the phrase "attack on society" recurring a
number of times. In a discussion of sitcom, for example,
"... Dear John I suppose you could include under 'attack on
society' ..."(L21,40)
The tendency to categorise is consistent with this subject's strong
interest in/collection of horror-film ephemera.
Nevertheless, several other respondents also noted that Meaning 
of Life seemed less playful, more serious than previous Monty Python
material. For two viewers, the remarks of one of the terrible
casualties of the 'Zulu War' episode were quite startling. The
remarks were
"Better than staying at home, eh sir At home if you kill
someone they arrest you. Here they give you a gun, and show
you what to do, sir. I mean, I killed fifteen of those bug-
gers sir Now at home they'd hang me. Here they give me a
fucking medal sir"
With two respondents this prompted an exchange wherein the episode
was seen as "still funny ..." but as quite a startling departure
from the usual mickey-taking:
"...that was more like a real...statement against..." (H5,11)
- 305 -
For another respondent, Meaning of Life
"is a statement about the human condition in a way the other
films aren't ..."(L13,65)
For another,
"... it's definitely one of their, it's actually almost a
serious film, for them ... they weren't just trying to be
funny ... I don't think they were trying to be ... literally
hysterical; I think they were trying to be a bit more ...
contemplating things ..."(L6,80)
With a little prompting, another subject agreed that the film was
... quite scathing, ... and also it's ... quite angry ..."
(L10,33)
It was clear that for a number of respondents the term 'satire'
would have been appropriate:
"... it's closer to satire ... the closest to satire they've
been ..."(H13,52)
"... if you sort of go back to the school sketch, ... the way
I saw it ... is that they were saying ... here you have a
school lesson to talk, supposed to talk about sex education
and they don't actually talk about sex; I thing it was try-
ing to make a point ... how ludicrous sex education is and
how ludicrous this British-sort-of-ness of pompous Brits, as
Death said later on ... British people are just so afraid of
sex, and it is so taboo, ... I always think that's quite a
serious sketch, because it's saying that ... we can't even
educate our own children in sexuality ..."(L6,87-88)
As we have already seen, the sub-text of class was sometimes made
explicit, sometimes in the context of an appraisal of Meaning of 
Life as more 'serious':
 ... seeing it this time there wasn't really that much I
would say was exceptionally funny ... possibly ... the fat
man at the table, basically because it's an attack on the
posh people ... the way that they isolate themselves ..."
(L21,36)
The comments on Establishment-directed satire were mixed, however,
with several others identifying a more indiscriminate, scatter-gun
strategy. Thus in two separate discussions about the arguable
sexism of the representation of women in Meaning of Life:
"... I wouldn't actually call them sexist, they actually poke
fun at a hell of a lot of things in society, so you can't
just isolate that ..."(L12,101)
"It attacks everything, it doesn't say, right, we're going to
attack women in this film ..."(L21,46)
There was also a (disconcerting) ambivalence about whether the
'attacks', however biting, were 'sincere'. This was typified by the
comments of one respondent who enjoyed the tendentious humour, but
seemed determined to 'excuse' it:
"... like the moment where they are, you know the Catholic
church and the Protestants, the first time I didn't know if
I have to laugh or not, and knowing the film now, I think
it's extremely funny ... because even if it ... could be
upsetting for some people, but for me, I know they don't
mean it, really ..."(L16,64) (cf. also L16,70)
The question of whether a film such as Meaning of Life actively
engages with issues such as sexism or exploits them was well put by
one respondent:
n . . are they saying well this is the position of women in
society, you know there are a lot of working-class women who
are like this who are shat upon, ... or are they actually
joining the bandwagon, I mean that's what's a bit difficult
... it is a question of how much you trust them in terms of
the other social comment that comes from the other sketches
..."(L12,101)
As we suggested above, this may in fact be less important than how
particular spectators decode the film. This ushers in the inevita-
ble category of the unconscious.
b) (vi) 'uncomfortable' material, release and inhibition
At this point we can begin to address the psychoanalytic func-
tions of some kinds of comedicity. Under what circumstances can an
affective investment in a potentially painful/threatening area
inhibit enjoyment of humour dealing with that subject area, and when
can such humour be enjoyed despite (or because of) the affective
investment? The tendentious subject-areas which most interest us
will be considered in a later subsection, but first let us look at
some other remarks.
One pair of respondents referred to their working situation (a
day centre for the handicapped) as an example of the need for humour
as a 'survival strategy':
"... if you sat and thought about all those people in there
and their disabilities and handicaps, and ... didn't find
any of them funny, you'd probably be a nervous wreck your-
self ... you'd be so overwhelmed by thinking, Christ, you
know it's really sad ... or it's really unfortunate etc. ...
if you couldn't find things funny and laugh, you know, laugh
things off ... and make jokes, you know after hours or what-
ever ... that relief isn't there, you need that relief
..."(H5)
"It's using humour as a kind of barrier, ... to bounce off
all your sort of distress or whatever ..."(H7)
... a release ... you don't really think about it as that
way ... but it is an automatic relief, ..."(H5)
"... I sort of look for things that are funny, as well at
times ... perhaps Unfortunate situations, ... maybe it is
for that reason, though ... so I don't hurt myself ..."(H7)
(15-16)
This pair also readily agreed that Meaning of Life contained a
number of elements which could cause offence or upset some people:
they noted the use of children in the 'Sperm Song' sequence and
possible parents' objections to this, and the use of model babies in
this and the preceding sequence.
The predisposition to use humour in this kind of way may tally
to some extent with an appreciation of Monty Python. Thus our
youngest respondent, in relation to the Organ Transplant scene,
said:
". .. a Monty Python (fan), even if they're repulsed by imag-
ery like that, in other films, will probably appreciate it,
because they know what to expect from Monty Python material,
but for ... a majority of the audience, and for someone who
doesn't appreciate Monty Python to such an extent ... they
would actually have shut themselves off from the scene ..."
(L21,38)
Appreciation of the Live Organ Transplants scene would therefore
depend largely on familiarity, on knowing what to expect, and on
removing real anxieties about bodily mutilation to a safe distance
(cf. also H11,53).
The effect of closeness to real illness, death etc. on their
appreciation of the blacker humour in Meaning of Life was commented
on by a number of respondents:
"... it's important, how close the events are together ... I
think having it ... on top of, ... literally within days is
... just ... not be on ... but certainly once the ... Imme-
diate pain was over, you know whether it was a death or
whatever, I think yes, it could be that, it would take the
sort of tightness out of the situation ..."(H11.52)
The degree of present involvement is clearly crucial. Speaking of
the masters v boys rugby match in the film, the same respondent
recalled that
 ... my oldest son got beaten up, a couple of weeks back, ...
quite badly beaten up ... but, fine, yes I was very upset at
the time, but looking at that, and there was a small little
part in that, where there's a couple of blokes, I think one
had hold of this lad's arm, the other one putting the boot
in, and I thought that was, that was very funny, ... you
- 309 -
probably wouldn't notice it, because it was over very
quickly 'cos it was while the camera was following something
else, ..."(H11,63)
Another respondent, L17, wondered if her enjoyment of the 'Grim
Reaper' sequence may have been affected by her father's cancer, but
felt not. Another, speaking of the 'Derek and Clive' tapes (cf.
footnote 193 above), remembered that
"... they do a hell of a lot of sketches about cancer, and
they really are quite horrific about it, ... I found it hys-
terically funny, and then my nan died of cancer, ... I still
found it funny, but it had a sore note, ... and nowadays if
I listen to them, ... I can still find it funny but ... it's
got a dead note about it ... (laughter) ... you know,
because it's obviously got quite close to my heart ... I can
remember just rolling about on the floor and it was so funny
the way they were singing these songs about cancer ...
because it struck home with me, with the death of my nan
after that I can't really look at it in the same light, ...
it's still funny, but it's not ... and I feel a bit guilty
thinking that I was ... laughing so much about it"
(H5,17-18)
A similar, though more tortuous, observation was made by the
respondent who had also so carefully distanced himself from the
'typical Monty Python fan'.
"... if you're ... experiencing a death in the family, cer-
tain things relating to death I'd think wouldn't be per-
ceived as so funny ... I've actually got a grandparent who's
... not got long to live ... but I've also had one who's
died recently, and there was that bit at the beginning of
Monty Python, where they had the funeral procession; I
didn't find that particularly funny; possibly in a more sort
of relaxed way towards death that may have been perceived as
more funny. But that's just generalising the idea ... giv-
ing an example. I wouldn't say that I'm actually responding
that way; I didn't actually respond that way ... I'm just
citing an example of how someone may actually be in a posi-
tion while viewing that material ..."(L21,41)
Though he did also give other reasons for his relative lack of
appreciation, this subject's somewhat odd use of pronouns and moods
("I didn't find that particularly funny ... possibly in a more ...
- 310 -
relaxed way towards death, that may have been perceived as funny")
was striking. At one point he pinpointed his insecurity:
"... in the past I don't think I've ever experienced that,
I'm more sort of repulsed by the imagery ... I feel it could
be my insecurity or ... but I feel it's more attacking me,
rather than attacking society or whatever ..."(L21,42)
The same respondent also noted the 'release' function which humour
can fulfil for writers/performers, which amounts to the same thing
as the 'survival strategy' of which H5 and H7 spoke (cf. pg.308
above):
". .. writing the material could be a release for something
that he's experienced ... a sort of emotional release ...
coming to terms with reality and actually ... making fun of
something they've been depressed by ..."(L21,42)
For each of us that sees a film writes that film within her/his own
head.
C) Comedic and other Pleasures
We have been obliged to note at various points above (especially
pp.74-80 ff.) that pleasure can scarcely be confined to the comedic,
and that the key terms with which such pleasures can be apprehended
seem to be repetition, recognition, novelty. 24 These key concepts
will perforce resurface throughout this section, and we shall
shortly be looking at how they were explicitly addressed by our
respondents. First, however, let Us consider some of the pleasures
(some, such as performance, closely linked to the comedic, others
less so) which were discussed along the way.
c) (i) general comments on comedic/non-comedic pleasures
The first comment of one respondent about Meaning of Life was
- 311 -
"I found it very, extremely funny, ... even if you don't
laugh at something, it ... makes me, ... I really like it
..."(L16,64)
In the shift from 'funniness' to 'liking' the relevance of the
laughter response is thrown into doubt. Another respondent com-
mented that it was
... a shame just to judge it ... on its 'laugh-factor' ..."
(H13,48)
Yet another, as well as feeling that much television comedy was not
funny, was interested in
"... the difference between 'is this funny?' and 'is this
amusing, or entertaining' ..."(L10,32)
The same respondent, referring to the HAT sheets, noted that there
"... a lot that I didn't find funny; I found it absorbing,
and I found it quite interesting ..."(L10,23)
with the result that, like some other respondents, this one found
himself scoring a lot of "moderately funny"s on the HAT sheet. This
was echoed, albeit hesitantly, in another interview:
"... I didn't find it that funny but I did enjoy it; ... when
I say funny I mean that I laughed at it; and when I saw
something spontaneous, it caused me to laugh, whereas just
because you didn't laugh doesn't mean that you didn't enjoy
it, ... I think I did enjoy watching it ..."(L6,81)
For another subject, L17, the only unambiguously enjoyable sequence
in the film was the Sperm Song.
This reassuring pluralisation has, however, to be set against
the statements of one or two subjects for whom the only pleasures of
the film were, in fact, comedic. Thus
"... I'd say the opposite, I didn't enjoy the film, but bits
of it were funny ... sort of a reverse thing ..."(L23,81)
The majority of the respondents, nevertheless, indicated that
they recognised in their responses to Monty Python both comedic and
other pleasures. Some of these other pleasures are also obviously
intimately connected to the comedic, yet we shall consider them
separately here since they were usually discussed in the interviews
outside a strictly comedic context.
C) (ii) performance
The pleasure of performance is clearly difficult to distinguish
from that of a 'simpler' recognition of a favourite actor or come-
dian.25
Performance is generally thought of in relation to the creation
or presentation of character; it is perhaps the expressive element
at the heart of acting as mise-en-scene.
"Performance is what the performer does in addition to the
actions/functions she or he performs in the plot and the
lines she or he is given to say. Performance is how the
action/function is done, how the lines are said."25
Performance elements can then be seen as the voice, gesture, body
posture and body movement. The problem is that the 'meaning'
attached to these elements is likely to vary according to the
historical/cultural conjuncture:
"The signification of a given performance sign is determined
by its place within culturally and historically specific
codes."47
This means that any attempt to establish a 'vocabulary' of perfor-
mance signs is bound to be fraught with difficulty, the more so
since
"... the signification of a performance sign is determined by
the multiple codes in relation to which it is situated, and
- 313 -
also by its place in the totality of the film."28
The piece by Dyer cited here deals with the more 'classical' film
acting/performance styles/elements. To take on something like the
performance signs of surrealist comedy would indeed be a major
undertaking
Nevertheless, it proved easy to evince from most respondents a
recall of pleasurable moments during Meaning of Life in which
individual performance played at least a major role.
One group was at first slow to pick up the notion of perfor-
mance, but began warming to the idea with
"... they're good actors, basically, and ... any of the
sketches that fall, ... flat, relatively speaking, I think
the acting in it, and the performance, is still very good
..."(H11,51)
In general, however, this was a good area to raise early in an
interview. Interestingly, the performance-skills of Terry Jones and
Graham Chapman were rarely concentrated on, nor indeed (less inter-
estingly in view of his only sporadic screen appearances) were those
of Terry Gilliam.
John Cleese ('John Cleese'?) was mentioned most frequently in
this context. For example, one respondent was not particularly
amused by the overt crudity of "couldn't you have your balls cut
off?", yet found the "vaginal juices" sketch funny
"because it was John Cleese ..."(H5,10)
For another,
"it was more particularly the actors' expressions"(L13,68)
A third respondent was
- 314 -
"... not sure where one thing ends and one thing begins, with
humour; ... it's also the way John Cleese parodies the
schoolteacher which is brilliant ..."
Yet another made a number of remarks about John Cleese. He
"... noticed that wherever there was something with John
Cleese I enjoyed it much more ..."(L10,23)
and indeed at one point accidentally referred to Fawltv Towers when
he meant to say 'Monty Python'. (L10,31)
Eric Idle also received a number of mentions.
"Eric Idle's ... Noel Coward face just tickled me anyway ..."
(H5,10)
"Eric Idle is the ... the sketch about the Grim Reaper, as
the hostess, was excellent ... (1113,51)
For the same respondent,
"... Eric Idle again is very good as this ... sort of woman
..."(H13,55)
A more distanced opinion was that
"Eric Idle I don't think was that good in this one, we didn't
see that much of him; Michael Palin I thought was good, his
facial expressions and his, just complete over-acting. I
think John Cleese, there's a touch of seriousness sometimes
about his acting which tends to destroy the ... zany bit
..."(L21,36)
Michael Palin's performance was praised less often, though
"... take the scene where they're doing the marching in the
square, it's Michael Palin's facial expressions, ... and the
way that he just bellows ... that actually I think makes
that scene ... there's nothing else but Michael Palin in
that scene ..."(L21,36)
The respondent who found him attractive said that
"... I quite enjoy watching him ... there's a kind of plea-
sure, oh here they are, here's the lads ... there's a sort
of pally feeling I get ..."(L12,106)
This last remark alerts us to the way in which recognition and
anticipation overlap with the enjoyment of performance as such. The
same respondent recognized that
soe at points I was thinking, am I laughing because this is
funny, or am I laughing because it reminds me of ... I mean,
John Cleese as a waiter, or in fact in the trenches ... it
was just like that waiter sketch, where he comes in with the
meat cleaver and says 'How dare you be rude about our
food?', ... because they BO easily go into kind of parodies
of characters they've done before, what you tend to do is
recognize that, that you laughed at before ..."(L12,94)
c) (iii) parody
Parody was spontaneously offered by many respondents as an
important element in their enjoyment (or otherwise) of Meaning of 
Life. For a minority the parody did not work when it was 'exagger-
ated':
"I felt it was such a simple make-up in just overdoing it ...
there was shot the first one and then the second and then
you knew how it would end, so that for me, it spoiled ..."
(H1,5)
The relative unsubtlety of the Live Organ Transplant sequence had a
similar effect for another respondent:
"... it is just evocative enough to, to make you slightly
queasy ... it's not so kind of parodic ..."(L13,71).29
H1 did, however, appreciate the gentler parody of the Crimson
Permanent Assurance section, as did a number of others. One saw the
references to
"Erroll Flynn and to Ben Hur (L16,68)
while another
"laughed at the send-up of "Burt Lancaster ... swashbuckling
and all that"" (L22,81)
Another respondent referred to
"... the Emerald City ... Wizard of Oz, ... the City of Lon-
don, the City, financial city, yes ..."(L5,96)
but then, in contrast to the above respondent (L22), went on:
"... and I'm quite enjoying myself, trying to spot the
cliche, and say where it came from, and how witty they were
being, but ... I wasn't really laughing ..."(L5,96)
It seems that the same (or similar) perceived content - the playful
use of generic cliches - has here been described as comedic on the
one hand ("found it funny") while on the other hand it has
reportedly provided some other, non-comedic, enjoyment.
Parody can, then, be seen as potentially, but not necessarily,
comedic. There is a clear degree of overlap with the 'making
fun'/'mickey-taking' discussed under the comedic rubric above
(pp.302-305), and the line between the two is difficult to draw. It
is interesting to note that the respondent who referred to the
Assurance section as "funny"(L22) is the same one who described the
send-up of the musical in the Sperm Song as funny.
Another section which several respondents picked up as parodic
was, indeed, the Sperm Song. The respondent for whom this was the
only really enjoyable part of the film particularly enjoyed the
outdoor sequence and its sending-up of musical choreography. For
L16 it was "like from Oliver"(L16,67) and we have already noted
(pp.302-305 above) how L22 laughed at the sending-up of Oliver and
of the musical genre. Interestingly, another respondent also felt
that it was
"... quite funny, that 'Every Sperm is Precious', but it was
just the parody was very clever as well, it was like Oliver
..."(L12,94)
- 317 -
and indeed the "but" here indicates that for her the parody here was
perhaps not of itself funny.
Several respondents also remarked on Eric Idle's parody of Noel
Coward in the 'Penis Song'. Elsewhere, the childbirth scene was
compared with documentary film about "childbirth in Germany" (L10,24)
and was described as "absolute parody"(L10,25). The same respondent
also affirmed that for him parody certainly could be funny: in
relation to John Cleese,
"... I was laughing at him and I was laughing at the parody
... of waiters ... I found myself doing that quite a lot ...
I was laughing at what it was getting at but not actually it
..."(L10,24)
Self-parody is perhaps more likely to be perceived as funny.
"... they seem to be very aware of the mould they were pushed
into, in terms of public school and Cambridge, and what sort
of people society expects to come out of that, and they've
actually turned it on its head, and that's really why I sup-
pose a lot of us find it funny ..."(L12,100)
Yet comedic or not, parody and imitation were certainly identified
by most respondents as central strands of Monty Python humour.
But then again,
"Monty Python was always like that really ... you'd have par-
odies ..."(L13,68)
The parody was something to be anticipated.
C) (iv) anticipation
Anticipation of comedic pleasure was acknowledge as a factor in
their enjoyment by a number of respondents.
"... probably it's also because I know
Python film, coming on ..."(H1,3)
"... I think actually just seeing them
bit of a laugh, because you're almost
.../..."(H11.50)
that it is a Monty
sort of brings on a
anticipating before
"I think you ... get to know the repertoire ..."(L12,112)
"... so first to see them makes me laugh already ..."
(L16,65)
One or two respondents noted the specific anticipation of Mr.
Creosote; thus
"... when that come on I did remember a lot of it ... as with
other bits, but more so with that particular thing, I was
actually laughing before things .. come up ..."(H7,9)
It is interesting, however, that for others the anticipation of Mr.
Creosote was unpleasurable; for example
"... I dreaded that bit ... because I remember when I first
saw it in the cinema, I remember the whole cinema going
(vomit sound) ..."(L14,93) (cf. also L17,24)
For one respondent the experience was not unpleasurable, but fore-
knowledge did reduce enjoyment:
"... you can only laugh like that when you see it the first
time; the second time you know what's happening, so it's not
so funny ..."(L6,80)
In one case there was a fairly emphatic denial of the pleasure
of comedic anticipation:
"... usually when you watch a comedy film for a second time,
(I'm) aware what's happening, it's not as funny ... Life of
Brian would probably be an exception, Time Bandits probably
another exception .. but, it's because you're expecting the
joke and as you're aware of the ending to it, and the way
it's presented, it's not as funny .."(L21,35)
There was one respondent who caught quite well the ambiguity of
whether anticipation is pleasurable or not.
"... you can also be disappointed when you know something's
going to happen .../... but even though you know something's
- 319 -
going to happen to that fat man, ... every time he pukes
into the bucket, you still laugh, ..."(H13,50)
C) (v) novelty
If we have identified some uncertainty about whether or not
anticipation/recollection of what was once funny/amusing itself
triggers amusement, the respondents were clearer about the impor-
tance of novelty as a factor in the funniness on Monty Python, most
particularly in the original TV series.
In response to L10's comment about this (L10,30), examples were
suggested of
"... I don't remember seeing animation like that before ...
and the opening as well, which is why my father didn't like
to watch it, ... the nude man playing the piano, you didn't
tend to get that on the BBC ..."(L17,30-31)
Another respondent remembered being "fascinated" by the "difference"
of Monty Python (H5,20). Yet another was
... enthralled, I thought what the hell is this programme?
... it was like being hit in the face with something, ...
very exciting ..."(L12,106)
Some respondents also recognized the way in which one particular
kind of novelty tends to have a limited life.
... the first two series seemed to have a lot of original
funny stuff in, then I found you'd get one or two good
jokes, and very thinly spread ... there seemed to be a clear
difference in my mind between the first and second series,
where it all seemed very new, and then it just seemed to be,
they had the same characters each time, and you're expected
to find funny them doing the same thing ... seemed to latch
onto a catch-phrase each programme, and spend ... quarter of
an hour working through that, it just didn't seem to have
the appeal of the earlier work ..."(L23,94)
We shall be looking at the shock/novelty value of smut later;
for the moment let us remember John Cleese's own admission that
"stuff with an element of shock does have the ability to make
an audience laugh much more than stuff without it, and
therefore when you're a little bit short of material it's
awfully easy to start flailing around ..."3
Thus in speaking of Mr. Creosote, one respondent remarked that
"... it's a bit crude, but the way that he's being sick ...
you don't usually see that in a film, it's original ..."
(L21,36)
c) (vi) rule-breaking
Clearly the rule-breaking of the Python team may be seen as the
self-indulgent play of a privileged 'elite' - a view favoured by
respondents L5 and L6 in particular (pg.294 above) - or it could,
with its play on subject-positions and on unitary/multiple diegesis,
be seen as profoundly progressive. As we have already noted,
"it would obviously be far too simplistic to see the Monty
Python films either as revolutionary surrealism or as devi-
ous reactionary opium." (pg.105 above)
Oddly, it is the respondents who were critical of the Python's
'elitist' position who also most clearly identified the group's
radical potential. For L6, rule-breaking novelty could certainly be
radical:
"... Jools Holland makes his 'groovy fucker' cock-up ... on
kids' television; I mean, you find that funny, and also in a
way radical because like you're breaking the mould by saying
it ..."(L6,87)
He clarified elsewhere that surprise and expectation are important
factors in this area. The other Monty Python 'critic' recognized
that "it was quite a naughty thing to watch"(L5,94,112). Asked what
kinds of people would be Python fans, another respondent thought
- 321 -
they would be "possibly rebellious against society"(L21,39). This
is the kind of proposition which it would be extremely difficult to
test, but there did appear to be some evidence that (some of) those
respondents who would probably see themselves as politically opposi-
tional originally saw the rule-breaking of Monty Python as invigo-
rating and positive. There was also a specificity in the responses
with regard to the age of the respondents when they first saw the TV
series, and indeed to the broadcasting 'climate' of the time.
c) (vii) enjoying the 'clever' 
While Monty Python humour was occasionally described in the
discussions as 'clever' in order to detract from its radical poten-
tial, the term was more frequently employed to identify a non-
comedic source of pleasure. For one respondent, referring to the
Crimson Permanent Assurance section, there were
"... some clever things in that, but not ... things that
would actually make you laugh out loud ... every time I've
seen that, I've found that better ... because when I first
saw it, I remember thinking, 'this is a bit ... naff' but
every time I've seen it, it's got better; ... but I enjoyed
that, it was good ... clever things in there ... funny-
clever ..."(H7,11)
This was echoed by a number of other respondents.
"... I find it's ... clever rather than amusing ..." (H11,48)
"... ingenious but not necessarily funny ..."(L22,84)
"... there's a moment ... where a guy walks on in a Zulu
suit, unzips it and it is in fact an immaculate white guy in
a suit, and then speaks with a, an African accent; which I
didn't think was funny, ... it even crossed by mind ... that
maybe I shouldn't be laughing at it ... but I found it quite
... again, ingenious, clever. But not necessarily funny
..."(L22,89)
In relation to the Mr. Creosote sequence, another respondent
enthused:
- 322 -
"... such great ideas, absolutely fantastic ... the gag in
itself is not funny at all ..."(L16,69)
The same respondent spoke of the (repeated) TV series:
"... it was clever, I could see ... what they were saying,
but I didn't laugh at all ..."(L16,69)
Laughter and appreciation of cleverness were not necessarily
mutually exclusive, however. One person referred to
"... the cleverness of the songs, ... even though they're
comic songs, you can appreciate that they're clever, the way
their words were put together ... and that made you laugh in
... a different sort of a way, ... that was really clever,
like the Sperm Song and that, it made you laugh because you
thought how clever the words were as well" (H5,12)
There was an interesting correlation between some of the com-
ments on ingenuity/cleverness and the biographical background of the
respondents. Thus two particular comments were made about Gilliam's
contribution.
"The animation at the very beginning I thought was good, yes,
there's some good bits in there ... that was clever ... some
good symbolic things ..."(H7,11)
came from someone who spends much of his spare time drawing and
painting.
"... they seem to have ... not put much of old Gilliam's ani-
mations in ... but, ... this pirate-ship-cum-office build-
ing, and I suppose quite an original way of ... of using
things ... I mean you go through thinking yes, yes that's
very very clever ... that's quite ingenious ... (Q: "that's
what you're enjoying") ... yes, yes ..."(H13,50)
was from an art teacher. There may thus be interpretive communities
which share an appreciation of the same kinds of cleverness. The
more explicit intellectual kind of cleverness would thus require a
higher degree of cultural capital:
"... there is a lot of subtlety there, but it's quite intel-
lectual, ... and you've got to know about ..."(L12,107)
- 323 -
At the same time, a lack of overfamiliarity can increase apprecia-
tion of cleverness; for one respondent, the fact that English is not
her first language had the following effect:
"... I especially enjoyed if I understood all ... the verbal
puns and jokes ... probably this for a native speaker
wouldn't be of so much importance of delight ..."(H1,4)
The most extensively cited section with regard to 'cleverness'
was probably the Crimson Permanent Assurance section, though one
reason for this was no doubt the fact that this section (partly by
virtue of being first) was difficult to rate on the HAT response
sheet. Thus one respondent
"... put a '1' for the first one, but I found it clever, but
I didn't find it ... funny ..."(L17,23) (cf. also L10,23 and
L5,96)
In another case,
"... I didn't find that at all funny ... really debating
whether to ring, 'this is not funny at all' or the next bit
.../... I couldn't recognize it, really, as kind of Monty
Python ... what I enjoyed was then the reference back to it
further on ... rather cleverly done" (L12,96)
The best example with which to end may be one which brings us back
to the possibility of a laughter not associated with funniness.
"It's very ... ingenious, but you know the ideas were very
ingenious, that they used the mundane office equipment and
made it look like weapons of slavery or piratical weapons
but ... it didn't make it extremely funny, you sort of
laughed at it ... ingenuity ..."(L6,81)
C) (viii) visual bleasure31
It is perhaps surprising that there were relatively few explicit
references to visual pleasures, to the pleasures of looking/seeing.
One respondent contrasted visual humour with joking humour (cf.
pg.295 above):
- 324 -
"... in a comedy film I wouldn't say so much a joke, it's
more visual, in a film ..."(L21,36)
though he also felt that in the 'Fighting Each Other' section,
"... the presenting of the clocks, the visual joke, was also
funny ..."(L21,37)
For our art teacher
"... there's some quite nice visual ... I wouldn't go so far
as to Bay visual delights, but ... it's not an unattractive
film" (H13,48)
One comparison was made with an earlier Monty Python film:
"... if I compare with The Holy Grail, I found less pleasur-
able to watch as a movie ... in Holy Grail I remember the
moments which are really pleasurable ... they were beauti-
ful, ... a kind of poetry ..."(L16,67)
though the same respondent did go on to describe the Crimson Perma-
nent Assurance section as very pleasurable, as poetic (68). The
point of Gilliam's direction was picked up on another occasion:
"... he's a very sort of powerful film director, he makes
things very watchable, ... I think that film's sort of built
on the television series, almost in some ways surpass them
because of that visual filmic skill that comes through ..."
(L6,81)
There were two other isolated references to visual humour.
".. some of the things they do, almost as slapstick, it's
very funny to see a major wearing ladies' underwear ..."
(L5,117)
"... there's visual humour, ... like when in the Tiger
sketch, when Eric Idle looked down, there was this tiger's
head which was kind of moving, ... just visually funny"
(L12,109)
C) (ix) production values, timing, writing
Some instances of remarks about these elements are considered
separately here insofar that the remarks were make independently of
the categories already dealt with, under which they may otherwise
have been subsumed.
There was some praise for the production values of the film.
"The actual sets and everything, it's not sort of cardboard
quick flash-in-the-pan sort of sketches, they're well struc-
tured, or well rehearsed ... there's a lot of work gone into
it ..."(H7,12)
Another respondent enjoyed the outdoor part of the Sperm Song,
feeling that it was well choreographed (L17,28). For another, the
film had
"... higher production values than most of the others, ... TV
Monty Python, or the earlier, first films, ... the pirate
thing at the beginning seemed to have all the ... afford to
kind of create that effect, the ... noisy sweep ..."
(L13,67)
though this respondent was not sure if this necessarily worked to
the film's advantage.
Only one direct comment was made about appreciating 'verbal
dexterity' (L12,109). Oddly, all the remarks made explicitly about
the script or the timing came from one respondent, and were, on the
whole, critical (though he did enjoy the film). Thus in the Sperm
Song, for example
"... (the kids) should be very much in character in that
sketch, you know they should be talking Yorkshire ... some-
how it starts to crumble, but it's a very good idea ..."
(H13,55)
The relative ineffectiveness of lines such as "Couldn't mummy have
worn some sort of pessary?" in this sequence was explained thus:
"Perhaps it should have been said by a younger kid, ... I
think the timing's wrong, the delivery's, somehow is cocked
up, I suppose it could be funny, yes ... I think that's a
technical point ..."(H13,54)
There was criticism of a 'joke' in the Protestant sketch:
- 326 -
"... and then they really spoil the joke, by ... the one
about, ... hundreds of kids, every time you have sexual
intercourse you(?) ... and all they need to say is 'we've
got two', ... you could leave it there, you don't have to
go, 'and we've had sexual intercourse twice' ... it's
spoilt "(H13,55)
The same respondent also speculated about how the idea of driving
the cars to heaven in the last section came to be in the script:
"... I think, when they were conceiving a particular idea,
... they sort of ... the special effects and said right,
let's do the cars as well ... you reinforce, and make the
joke, that bit funnier ... but there's other occasions when
they ... don't ... take their ideas forward ... which is a
shame ..."(H13,61)
C) (x) narrative and structure
One respondent pinpointed an important area of pleasure.
"... it's also to do with expectation of the narrative, isn't
it ..."(L12,112)
and it is striking that comments in relation to this tended to
polarize between those expressing appreciation of the disconnected-
ness of Meaning of Life and those which were critical of it.
Some respondents liked the structure of the film. Thus
"... in terms of just pleasure, I had a greater conception of
this as a movie ..."(L13,67)
Another respondent liked
"... the way that anything can happen, one minute you'll have
one scene, the next minute something completely ... differ-
ent or out of the ordinary ... also the way scenes continue
on from each other, ..."(L21,35)
and noted the way in which narrative can work against the comedic;
for him Meaning of Life
"... destroys the conventional narrative, which usually over-
kills the joke because in a film you're just ... plodding
through the plot and are waiting for jokes to sort of appear
... at least in the Monty Python you can stop something
- 327 -
straight away and start again with a complete new idea with-
out ... complaining that you've destroyed the narra-
tive."(L21,43)
One respondent, to whom the film did not otherwise appeal,
"... liked the length of each item ... for me they weren't
too long, but long enough to hold your interest ..."
(L17,23)
She contrasted this favourably with And Now For Something Completely
Different, which had been a disappointment:
".. some of it just seemed to have no structure at all, you
just felt when they were writing it that you just didn't
really know what they were getting at ..."(L17,31)
Many respondents, however, though they found other sources of
enjoyment in the film, were critical of the structure of Meaning of
Life. In some instances the criticism was of the internal pac-
ing/structuring of the sketches;
"... sometimes things can seem to be a bit laboured ... try
to drag everything out a bit, sometimes ..."(H7,11)
In another discussion two other respondents agreed that at one point
in John Cleese's sex-education lesson
"... the joke had gone far enough ..."(L12)
"Yes, the joke was just ... it was a bit much; the funny
thing was, I think the subtlety of ... the shy grammar-
school boys .../... that was the funny bit, and his ...
inability to communicate towards them ... so by the time the
woman came on ..."(L5)
"... the point of the joke really was, yes ..."(L12) (97)
Some other adverse comments were of a more general nature. For
one respondent there were "too many fillers"; he compared Meaning of
Life with Life of Brian:
"... which I did enjoy, ... more cohesive, it made more sense
as a story, as a plot ... this I found quite disappointing
... because some of the ideas it seemed to me could have
been great ... but they didn't quite achieve ..."(L10,28)
- 328 -
In contrast to the above respondents for whom some sketches went on
far too long, the solution for this respondent would have been to
"develop things more", or "keep them going longer"(L10,28). Later,
after extolling the virtues of Fawltv Towers, he went on:
"... my main criticism of this was that, ... something gets
going, and it gets moving, and then it jumps, or it stops
completely ..."(L10,31)
Another respondent felt that
"... they had all these wonderful ideas for sketches ... but
they didn't know how to link them, so they kind of went into
this ... Seven Ages of Man ... a kind of imposed structure,
I wasn't terribly happy about ... but sometimes the sketch
kind of went way off, and didn't actually stay on the 'age'
theme ... I thought it was kind of imposed a bit, that
structure, and ... I'm not sure it worked ..."(L12,108)
(this became part of the discussion with LS (cf. pg.289 above) about
how audiences would 'read' the artifice of the imposed structure)
There was at other points more complimentary discussion of the
use of linking devices. L12 herself recognized the effective-
ness(/novelty) of such devices in the original TV series:
"... what I think was very good about the series on televi-
sion initially was that, ... when they'd made their point
and they wanted to end the sketch, they'd go into a cartoon,
... or 16 tons, or someone saying 'This is a very silly
sketch; and now for something completely different' ...
they actually linked them well ..."(L12,98) (cf. also
H13,48)
Another respondent referred more explicitly to his pleasure:
"... within the film, what I found enjoyable and pleasurable
but not funny was the beginning of one scene leading in from
... the end of another one ..."(L22,84)
The polarity of appreciation/non-appreciation of lack of struc-
ture was encapsulated in one brief exchange which was in fact about
the Derek and Clive tapes:
"I've never found that as funny as Monty Python ... I've
always found it a bit sort of gratuitous of swearing and all
sorts of things ... some of it was humorous but overall I
don't think it's quite ... as well structured, if you like,
as Monty Python ... it's not scripted or anything anyway is
it ... it's very loosely ..."(H7)
"... and yet that's something that made me ... I found fun-
nier because ... it's just them sitting in the thing getting
drunk ... spouting all these things ... really off the cuff
sort of stuff ..."(H5) (19)
To some extent this appreciation or lack of appreciation can be
related back to enjoyment of the new/unstructured as opposed to
enjoyment of an (expected) structured narrative. More about
unstructured absurdity below; first let us take a closer look at
what our subjects said about the pleasures or repetition and recog-
nition.
C) (xi) repetition
Of the sixteen respondents who were interviewed, ten had seen
Meaning of Life before. Some reported that on this occasion their
enjoyment was greater:
"... I think all the funny bits were those ones that I recog-
nized again this time and made me laugh again .../... so I
don't think any bits didn't work again ... if anything they
worked more ..."(H5,9)
On the Crimson Permanent Assurance section, another commented:
"... when I first saw it, I remember thinking 'this is a bit
naff', but every time I've seen it, it's got better ..."
(H7,11)
For a third respondent, enjoyment was also greater:
"... I saw things I didn't see the first time or the second
time, because ... I know for example the gag, I know the
story, I know what's going to happen, so I'm watching more
round the ..."(L16,68)
The respondent who had asserted that comedy tended to work less well
on repeat viewing (pg.319 above) also felt that
"... usually comedy is not so artistic as other sorts of
film, ... for me, watching a film more than once is for it's
artistic quality ..."(L21,35)
One respondent reported a mixed reaction:
"... some of them certainly do sour when you've seen them a
couple of times ..."(H11,48)
whereas with the Mr. Creosote section
"... every time I look at that, there's some little other bit
that you can see ..."(H11,49)
Two other respondents were more sure of a decreased appreciation.
One simply stated the fact (L22,79), while the other
"... definitely thought it was funnier when I saw it the
first time; the ... Mr. Creosote sketch really did crease me
when I saw it at the cinema ..."(L6,80)
this latter from a respondent who tended not to see anticipation as
enhancing enjoyment.
Finally, two respondents raised the issue of the context within
which the (original) viewing had taken place. For one, the circum-
stances of the initial experience had been inhibiting:
"... I went with someone who really didn't like it and
objected to it ... and I picked up on that ..."(L13,64)
In another case the appreciation of the 'liver donor' section in
particular had been diminished:
"... I saw this on video directly after seeing Dawn of the 
Dead which might have an effect on my reactions towards that
scene ... I watch a lot of horror films .../... it's differ-
ent to the horror film I'd usually see ... it'll be serious,
someone actually being murdered or something ... it's just
the way that they come, these two medics come in with ease,
it's just something natural to them ... the way that they're
just taking the organs out, I suppose the first time I would
have thought was funny ..."(L21,38)
- 331 -
C) (xii) recognition of 'the real' 
A large number of approving comments were made about the 'real-
ism' of various sequences in relation to the respondents' own
experience. For one respondent the early sequence with the fish
greeting each other in a fish tank was particularly amusing:
"... having worked in an office it really made me laugh even
more, ... I used to sit and think that when I used to work
in an office ... bored out of my skull I used to look at
every one saying 'good morning' I used to imagine them with
fish bodies ..."(H5,9)
Another respondent's comments in relation to the sex-education
lesson, that
"... anything that's in a classroom is not interesting what-
ever it is, you know you turn off ..."(H13,51)
"... they've taken the ultimate, which you'd think ... boys
would be interested in, but in a classroom situation, you
turn off ... whatever it is ..."(H13,54)
were clearly also related to his experience, as pupil and/or
teacher. This was echoed by a comment about "beautifully observed
classroom practice"(L12,97).
A number of elements were described as 'realistic'. For one
person the childbirth sequences were particularly so (H5,17). The
same respondent and her partner found Mr. Creosote's vomiting
"... incredibly realistic, I think everyone's ... they know
what ... it's sort of like sort of rings true ..."(H7,19)
"... there's a lot of realistic things in there, like the
sick really looks like sick and the babies really look like
new-born babies, and the liver really looks like it's ...
the way they do it, so they do make it very ..."(H5,19)
at which point H7 mentioned his enjoyment of the production-values
of the film. The childbirth sequence reminded another respondent of
an article he had seen about childbirth:
- 332 -
"... it was identical to that ... in that everything was
mechanical, everything was machine ... every birth in Ger-
many is forced .../... this was an absolute parody ..."
(L10,24-25)
Similarly, another respondent was reminded of the reality of organ
transplant markets (L16,72).
A few respondents also indicated that they were more or less
consciously identifying32 with characters or predicaments in the
film, as though they were 'real'.
"I felt very sympathetic with that woman talking about her
period ... it's just this crazy talk that must come out in
this awful situation ..."(H1,8)
For the same respondent, the sex education lesson was the funniest
part of the film because it was
"... close to my own reality ... it's impossible, because how
should anyone be bored, or should any of these pupils be
bored and not pay any attention when it's a lesson on sex,
especially when it's so openly discussed and in such a very
sort of casual, but very open and straightforward a manner
..."(H1,2)
Another commented, in relation to the rugby match, that
"... I think you'd have to have gone to public school to find
that really funny ... or you'd have had to play rugby ... as
a kid ..."(L10,29)
Another respondent, in another group, observed that
"... I feel that the sort of school that they're using for
that scene is more to do with the sort of school they went
to, ..."(L5,94)
A number of respondents were sure that the 'best' humour is
based on observation of the real. Praise of earlier Monty Python
material included
"I think with their earlier performances what they seemed to
do is take something that is fairly normal in life and put
an edge on it, a twist on it .../... and it's very funny,
because you can almost see that sort or thing happening ..."
(H11,51)
- 333 -
and indeed the same respondent commented approvingly that
"... almost situation you're in, you can think of a parallel
that they've done ..."(H11,60)
The situation comedy most appreciated by this sample seemed to be
Only Fools and Horses, largely because of a perceived familiarity
with the people associated with the programme (L17,33), the charac-
ters being "easily identifiable"(L21,40). For another respondent,
"... it's the situations that arise from real life that are
funnier; it's the ironies and the expectations that aren't
met, are undercut, which I think are funnier .../... kind of
observation of life: look, this is how it is, and if you
just slip that down a bit, ... it's something else again ...
isn't it absurd, isn't life absurd? And I thitik S:t's hilbm-
iously funny ..."(L12,109)
The same person had amplified her response to Question 39 on the
questionnaire:
"... I find real-life situations hilariously funny sometimes
and become hysterical about them (i.e. laugh till I cry).
Perhaps that is why I find so-called 'serious' programmes so
funny rather than situation comedy - which is stilted and
predictable." (Original emphasis)
One respondent did find that Meaning of Life contained examples
of good/accurate observation. The teacher who appreciated the
'realism' of the pupils' boredom in the classroom also referred to
the Penis Song in the restaurant:
"... chap saying, 'what a dreadfully witty song' ... sug-
gests that these people never listen to the words anyway
... everybody thought it was wonderful; so again, you've got
a little bit on observation ..."(H13,54)
This (art) teacher also suggested an additional touch of excremental
realism:
"The fish idea was nice ... Again ... whenever I see gold-
fish there's always a great trail of shit dangling from
them, you see, now not one of those had anything like this
... and they do ... other strange things, goldfish, ... it'd
be so good if they had this ... they were all sort of keep-
ing their distance and swimming this way and that ... that
- 334-
seemed a little sparse, ... just ready for a bit of develop-
ment, that ..."(H13,61)33
Too close a relation to 'reality', on the other hand, could also
threaten or indeed destroy enjoyment. Thus one respondent, during
the hospital sequence, was relating
"... it to my own experiences in hospital and everything ...
rather than maybe laughing ..."(L17,24)
As another speculated,
"... if it would be based on a true, really documentary or
realistic I wouldn't laugh ..."(L16,74)
The comedic mode within which Monty Python 'violence' is set was
recognized as important:
"... that kind of violence is no sweat, I mean I can take it;
... it's when you get the sort of television sequences about
the violence that's actually happened, like someone's let a
bomb go off in a store ... there's people all over the
street with sort of bits off them, ... that's completely
another field ..."(H11,63)
"... for example an injection ... I wouldn't mind to have it
myself but I can't watch it; and that, the organ ... live
transplant ... it's the way it's done .../... everything is
over the top, ... it's a joke ..."(L16,71)
c) (xiii) recognition, repetition and datedness 
This will be the last subsection on comedic and other pleasures,
and here we pick up again the strand of recognition related to the
'anticipation' of pp.318-320 above. (cf. also pp.73-74 above)
For one respondent, the recognition of
"... certain catch-phrases and just seeing the Monty Python,
when they dress up as women, they always use the certain
voice ..."(H5,8)
was pleasurable. "Knowing what's going to happen" was clearly not
- 335 -
an obstacle for a number of subjects, though it is interesting that
many of the examples cited by respondents were not from Monty
Python. Thus for example one person referred to the continued
liking for the Goons (L14,95), while another
"... found Fawltv Towers very funny and I still do ... I can
still watch it again and again, and find it BO funny that it
hurts ... but I've never had that with Monty Python ..."
(L10,31)
For one respondent, the pleasures of recognition/repetition were
explicitly absent in Monty Python:
"... I tried to watch (And Now For Something Completely Dif-
ferent) and ... although again the familiarity, thinking
about the parrot sketch ... I just thought oh no ... we were
watching it on a small black and white TV, that's not ideal
... but I expected to enjoy it far more that I actually did"
(L17,31)
Recognition was certainly not always pleasurable. The response of
some was close to indifference:
"... you do tend to know the characters so well ... I don't
think about that, I just (knew) what they were like, and I
didn't gain any extra pleasure from seeing the same sort of
characterisations again ..."(L6,84)
and indeed in one case recognition was described as quite unpleasur-
able:
"... watching the reruns of (That Was The Week That Was)
quite recently; you sat there and you thought, oh my God/
... and we laughed at that ... quite one of the most dis-
turbing things I've ever ... like losing your religion,
isn't it, suddenly it doesn't mean anything ..."(L14,114)
One respondent (unwittingly) put his finger on the common ambiva-
lence surrounding comedic repetition. Referring to a 'Festival of
Cartoons' which he had seen,
"... everyone's laughing like mad for the first two or three
... and then after you laugh less and less because you're
losing ... you always find, they are the same, ... the last
one is as funny as the first one; .../... it's like Laurel
and Hardy, you know you really laugh a lot at the first one,
and after, then you just can't, or you lose your ability to
laugh ..."(L16,67-68)
- 336 -
Shortly after this the reference to Laurel and Hardy recurs:
"... this famous Laurel and Hardy, they fight with all the
cakes and cream and everything ... custard pies, you can see
it a hundred times, you still will laugh ..."(L16,77)
Against the notion of recognition/repetition there is always the
new. We have seen that novelty was one of the characteristics of
Monty Python most valued by our respondents, and indeed one of them
reported how, at the time of the original TV series, she would judge
people according to their response to the programme:
"... I always imagined that it appealed to people who were
very open-minded, ... if I sort of met people that didn't
... like it or when I played their record didn't find it
funny, then that used to quite colour my judgement about
them ..."(H5,21)
This is the same respondent for whom catchphrases/characterisations
are now comfortably pleasurable (pg.335 above): a fine encapsulation
of the tension so commonly observable between the new and the
reassuring. The tension was articulated by another respondent:
"... it's pleasurable, like I'm meeting some old friends; but
the humour is deadened somewhat because it's also predict-
able, so you have to weigh up a certain pleasure or warmth
you get from that against the loss of cutting edge ... of
humour ..."(L12,112)
If only the dichotomy was BO straightforward For many respon-
dents the relation to recognition/repetition was not so comfortable,
and for a number of them Monty Python had become quite 'dated'. We
have already noted that it is quite possible to laugh or find
pleasure despite "knowing what's going to happen", but for some of
our respondents it was precisely 'knowing' in advance that was the
problem. Thus for example in one case (H1) the 'absurdity' of the
clock-scene in 'Fighting Each Other' was counteracted by the fact
that she "knew what was going to come". When one respondent
- 337 -
referred to "knowing the repertoire"(L12,112) and the enjoyment of,
for example,
"... seeing who's going to dress up as a woman this time, or
who's going to play the stiff-upper-lip ..."(L12,112)
another replied that that was exactly why he no longer found it so
funny (L5,112).
Datedness was explicitly identified by a number of respondents.
For one, Monty Python humour had "aged very quickly" or become
superceded by Mel Smith, Griff Jones etc. (L10,25), and had owed
initial successes to its novelty-value, which was why "it appears so
dated now"(L10,30). He remembered that he and his flat-mates had
recently watched one of the repeated episodes
"... and we all turned it off, because we couldn't watch it
... I'm sure it was funny at least ten years ago ..."
(L10,31)
Another continued to find some Monty Python programmes funny, but
agreed that "it might have dated a little bit ..."(L16,69). A
respondent who otherwise came across as very much a Monty Python
'fan' also agreed that
"... you've had so many things in between times that have
gone along the lines of Monty Python ... now when you see
the really old episodes, perhaps they do look a bit dated,
... because you've had so much other stuff ... when you've
seen it again you tend to think well that's been done
before, but it's been done by the copiers of Monty Python,
..."(H5,22)
a view endorsed by H7. This was elsewhere echoed by
"... there's a lot of that sort of humour around now, ... I
think it's dropping off lately, ... The Young Ones ...
humour centred around a sort of ... graphic slapstick ..."
(L5,93)
and this respondent said that
"I think it's ... passe' really ... Monty Python, almost ... I
felt very passe' ..."(L5,94)
- 338 -
This in turn followed a comment in the same discussion:
"... they set the whole thing off really ... they've just set
a whole new trend, and therefore now you've had all what's
come since, and recently there's like The Young Ones, with
milkmen wandering around with cleavers in their heads ...
Filthy Rich and Catf lap, that sort of thing, ... when you go
back to this sort of humour it doesn't have the shock-value
it had originally ... it is dulled a bit, certainly ..."
(L12,94)
This particular discussion did thus identify Monty Python as
influential in the development of a particular strand of 'anarchic'
comedicity:
"... they've set such a pattern for the way humour's gone
through the seventies and eighties, ... that's the problem,
they're ... not necessarily acknowledged as being as impor-
tant as they are ... everyone kept saying, oh, Not The Nine 
O'Clock News, must watch that, ... yes, it's very funny, but
I still thought it was very derivative of Monty Python, I
thought, hang on, I've seen this before, ... the same even
with The Young Ones, which I enjoy enormously but it's ...
like a Monty Python sketch gone mad, isn't it ..." (L12,113)
For L5,
"... that's just institutionalised humour, ... to a big
extent I think Monty Python is to a certain extent these
days ... doesn't detract from how effective it has been; but
I think it's institutionalised a lot ..."(L5,95)
The third respondent in this group put the cat among the pigeons (or
was it Pythons) by agreeing with this, but finding that
"... all humour is going to be institutionalised, isn't it"
(L14,95)
"... yes, ... that's where The Young Ones and that sort of
humour seems to be ... I think another series of that ilk
would be boring ... totally and utterly boring ..."(L5,95)
d) Some tendentious aspects of the comedic 
We have identified in previous sections some ways in which the
comedic can challenge the dominant social/symbolic order. Here we
shall be examining the comments of our respondents in relation to
- 339 -
four such areas: the absurd, the violent, the sexual and the excre-
mental. We shall then also consider the responses concerned with
the (more obviously ideological) representations of gender, race and
class in Meaning of Life.
d) (i) the absurd
In view of the centrality of the absurd/surreal to the Monty
Python 'image', there were perhaps fewer unsolicited references to
it than may have been expected. 34 Included in what follows are the
several comments in relation to incongruity, to the subversion of
expectations, to the 'bizarre'.
Some respondents expressed appreciation of the more evidently
absurd sections of Meaning of Life. Thus of the Middle of the Film
'find the fish' sequence, one said
"... I thought that was wonderful, that was the thing that
saved the whole thing ... that was the top spot ... that was
a cracker I mean had the fish not have been in, ... it
wouldn't have got a '4' ... but again you know you don't do
much of that in the film ..."(H13,61)
and the other person present added:
"I thought it was quite good ... very funny ... particularly
the first time I saw it ...(H11,62)
Another respondent also found this to be one of the funniest sec-
tions:
"... some of the things that appealed to me ... were the ones
that were least motivated by any sort of sense of social
satire ... I couldn't pin them down but that whole business
about finding the fish, which I just found really funny, and
totally bizarre .../... may be why it struck me as having
this genuine sense of the absurd ..."(L13,72)
For another, the Mr. Creosote scene
"... makes me laugh, maybe because, the total absurdity of
the scene ..."(L16,67)
For this respondent, the sequence
"... wanted to show the absurdity of language, and the way
... we're using it ..."(L16,66)
During that particular discussion I raised the distinction between
'social' comedy and the comedy of the 'irrational' (which corre-
sponds broadly to John Ellis' categories of "comedy of social
disruption" and "comedy of gags, illogicality and incongruity" (cf.
pg.156))and the same respondent commented:
"... that's why maybe I laugh, it's more irrational, totally
absurd, .../... for me, irrational or absurd has to be
comedy ..."(L16,74)
In the context of a discussion about 'intellectual' humour,
another respondent enjoyed summarising the 'Jean-Paul Sartre sketch'
from one of the TV episodes, and described it as
"... totally bizarre, but ... there's ... all sorts of ele-
ments there ..."(L12,108)
This was the respondent (cf. pp.298 & 334 above) for whom the most
rewarding humour was rooted in everyday observation: "isn't it
absurd, isn't life absurd ..."(L12,109).
For another person the absurdity of parts of Meaning of Life had
a different relation to 'reality'. She was generally averse to
exaggeration, but
"... I liked the thing with this big clock being set up and
then ... this one was hit ... ding going 'ding' ... I liked
that ... I thought it was absolutely ridiculous ..."(H1,5)
If the absurd was amusing, it was because of the discrepancy in
relation to 'reality'. Referring to the point in 'Fighting Each
Other' when Eric Idle has had his leg bitten off, she spoke of
- 341 -
"... this absolute irrational and grotesque ... behaviour,
the way they deal with ... it's so absurd; reality, it can't
be realistic especially like the people say, ... what, and
you didn't wake up? Exactly what I thought: how can one be
so stupid ... it's just the contrast of what is normal and
this makes me laugh and on top of that it's not only the
contrast ... they take it as their real world and they exag-
gerate more and more, they have their own code within this
contrast ..." (H1,6)
While this respondent could thus appreciate absurdity in relation to
some (albeit absent) normative reality (indeed the formulation "it's
just the contrast of what is normal and this makes me laugh" is a
good description of the Freudian 'comic'), the more nonsensical
absurdity of 'Find the fish' was another matter:
"... there was one sequence where I felt it was pure non-
sense, ... there were three people, no two, the one with the
... ballet dance ... I didn't get that, I didn't understand,
... that was pure nonsense, the elephant, the person with
these long arms and the other one, ... pure nonsense. I
couldn't make anything of it, I didn't understand it ...
("And you didn't find it funny ...") ... No, no ... "(H1,6)
We have seen that H13 and L13 were particularly appreciative of
the surreal/dada nature of this sequence; it was noted not
infrequently that in comparison with the original TV series, Meaning
of Life was less marked by this comedic mode.
"... that's also the sort of thing you'd expect more in the
original series; and the cartoons were quite surrealistic,
..."(L12,100)
"... yes, the cartoons always were, but I'm not sure that I'd
have expected anything like that sketch in the series"
(L5,100)
H13 agreed that the 'Find the fish' sequence was "the only bit
that's thrown in ..."(H13,62). Prompted, one respondent agreed that
there was a relative absence of the surreal animation of the TV
programmes, but felt that
"... this whole thing of the office building turning into a
ship, ... that all seems to relate to it, it's not actually
animated but ..."(L23,82)
- 342 -
to general agreement. Interestingly this respondent, who did not
like the film as a whole, did commend the surreal/incongruous
elements (L23,81).
Other responses to the nonsense-absurd were not so complimen-
tary.
"... that scene with the fish thing, ... 'where's the fish?',
... that the sort of Monty Python that I remember ... and
yet ... I just thought it was rubbish ... I hadn't thought
about that in terms of the television programmes before, ...
it almost seemed to me to be a very schoolboyish sort of
humour, and I didn't really like that bit at all, it wasn't
very good ..."(L6,82)
and the other subject in this group who did like the surreal/
incongruous Crimson Permanent Assurance section (pg.342 above)
agreed about 'Find the fish':
"Oh, yes, that was one of my complete score zeros."(L23,82)
For L5 the surreality was disquieting:
"... vague perceptions of the world associated with public-
school sensibilities, really strange sort of ideas, ... very
bizarre ... surreal ... a bit more than just ... I thought
that was quite exceptional ... exceptional, for them ..."
(L5,100)
The same respondent had wondered whether the obviously imposed
narrative 'structure' may have been a "marketing ploy" (cf. pg.289
above), and later commented on the tensions in the 'structure':
"Yes, it's just ... just stupid ..." (L5,109).
There were a number of references to 'incongruity'. One respon-
dent in particular found one or two of the incongruities very
amusing, and laughed a great deal even when recounting the examples:
"... you've got these two incongruous things, Noel Coward's
voice and a song about dicks .../... 'There he is now,
you'll notice, chaps, that the penis is hard' ... 'what's
that you've got there?' ... 'it's an ocarina, sir.' ...
- 343 -
'bring it here' ... it's just again, this ... incongruous-
ness ..."(H13,54)
We shall wonder again later whether this respondent's particular
mirth was prompted by the incongruity described or by the nature of
the subject-matter ... In the case of another respondent and the
Penis Song, when I wondered why he laughed at the first mention of
'penis', his response was
".. it wasn't just the mention of the word 'penis' ... no,
it was the juxta ... the incongruity, the comedy lies in the
incongruity ..."(L13,66)
The other respondent present identified the incongruous context of
the posh restaurant which made him laugh (L16,66).
Similarly for another respondent, the source of his amusement at the
sex education lesson was the incongruity of sexual explicitness in
the public-school context (H7,10).
The person for whom the absurd elements were among the only pleasur-
able features of the film found that
"... the initial incongruity of someone coming into a plush-
looking restaurant and saying things like 'fuck off I'm
full'; I found that amusing ..."(L23,82-83)
but he was also impatient with obvious overuse of the device:
"... there was sort of incongruity which was amusing to start
with but it gets a bit laboured after a while; the idea of
fighting with office stamps, and things like that ..."
(L23,81)
The absurd also seemed to be linked to confounding/subversion of
expectations:
"... going back to the schoolboy sketch, though, a lot of the
pleasure of that was confounded expectation of other things"
(L14,98)
In relation to the TV Jean-Paul Sartre sketch,
"... two housewives ... in the launderette, looking him up,
... it's when they're arguing about philosophy in the laun-
derette .../... but it's just the same as ... the boys in
school, ... it's totally unexpected ..."(L12,107)
In the same group also, the third respondent postulated a joke-model
in terms of a systematic subversion of expectations:
"... I mean you're taking ... the unexpected, taking a situa-
tion, and giving it an apparent context, and suddenly chang-
ing it, I'd have said it was a joke ..."(L5,110) (cf. also
pg.27 above)
Finally, there was a brief discussion with this same group of
how comedians well before the second world war had been using
material every bit as 'bizarre' as much of the absurd Monty Python.
It is worth reminding oneself that absurdity was most certainly not
'invented' by the Monty Python team
d) (ii) the violent 
At various points above we have discussed the significance of
aggressivity in (Freudian) models of the comedic, and also some of
the historical and psychoanalytic developments in representations of
fragmented bodies (cf. pp.150-151 & 163-167). How did our respon-
dents react, for example, to the 'violence' of the Live Organ
Transplants sequence? Were there other instances of more covert
violence/aggressive humour to be observed?
Four of the respondents were not happy with the Live Organ
Transplants sequence.
"... I really felt terrible with this ... ("but you were
still laughing ...") ... yes, because ... oargh ... well,
because of his face, ... he was feeling terrible as well,
- 345 -
this bloke ... and because it went on and on and on, and in
the end I couldn't ... I just don't know if I really
laughed, all the way through ... oh I hate, especially when
he handled this organ and he cut the ... but that was ter-
rible I felt"(H1,2)
This respondent also had difficulty with the war scene, and with the
exaggerative violence of
"... this Zulu fight, where this boy ... he's stabbed, well
it's absolutely unnecessary ..."(H1,5)
This respondent did recognize the distinction between modes of
(comedic) violence:
"... in this first episode, with the Assurance Company ... I
felt when he actually stabbed somebody ... this is what I
find not ... I don't want to see that ... but, that he sort
of is ... jumped out of the window, or that he falls out,
... I laugh about it, it's because I can't see blood actu-
ally ..."(H1,5)
Some forms of comedic 'violence' can consequently be amusing:
"... for example this game of rugby, ... oh it was so brutal
... ("yes, but it made you laugh") ... yes, it really did
... I feel there is no harm, they will get up again, these
boys ... reminded me more of a mud-battle or whatever ... it
wasn't really ... killing somebody" (H1,7)
Another respondent found the gore overwhelming.
"... I just find that sort of gore overwhelms any humour in
it ... the impact ... of the idea that if you've got a kid-
ney card then someone's going to come and take your kidneys,
that initial thing's fairly funny but then I find all the
spurting tomato ketchup gets a bit overwhelming" (L23,80)
"I don't want to see the detail of it ..."(L23,83)
The gory details jeopardised his enjoyment of other parts of the
film:
"If that had happened ... in the first scene, that would have
coloured my view of the entire film"(L23,85)
Referring also to the Live Organ Transplants sequence, another
respondent was thus dissatisfied:
- 346 -
"... much as I often tend to laugh at those things, I didn't
for that one ... it was quite unfunny and there was an idea
there and yet ... it wasn't very well developed or very well
executed; and the idea ... he went down to the library and
... they were straight after him ... that didn't really come
across very well ... that's the nearest I think I got to
thinking, well that's very gratuitous, and I don't normally
think that often that violence is that gratuitous ... but I
did actually in that scene, I thought well what's the point
..."(L6,83)
A fourth person:
"... where he's actually holding the organs in his hand and
he's trying to cut ... I found a bit repulsive ..." (L21,37)
This was later qualified:
"... I mean I'm quite hardened to something like that ... I
did say 'repulsive' a couple of minutes earlier, but I
wasn't repulsed ... to turn away or be violently ill or
something ... but that's probably from seeing BO many horror
films, ..."(L21,38)
Characteristically this particular respondent had started with a
more 'distanced' evaluation of how the sequence worked:
"... I think there was the basic concept for that ... they
could possibly come along and take your organs while you're
alive, and the way that ... the person answered the door and
he said, well it's inconvenient, busy ... I think that was
the only thing that was funny in that scene ..."(L21,37)
One respondent expressed indifference in these terms:
"... I felt the same about the ... liver transplant ... I
actually kind of felt that something had left me ... as he
was pulling these bits out and cutting them off .../... I
didn't like it but at the same time it wasn't revolting ...
it wasn't even kind of particularly close to .../... in a
way it's fairly explicit but at the same time it's done so
tongue in cheek, because it's so over the top ..."(L10,26)
Two other comments were made about how the Organ Transplants
sequence could offend others.
"I suppose the transplant scene can be seen as sort of sick
... over the top ..."(H7,17)
"... I can think of lots of people ... would get up and walk
out ... not because they objected to it on moral grounds or
anything, but just because they found it physically ..."
(L13,71)
- 347 -
One respondent agreed to being affected by the gruesomeness of the
sequence, but still found it funny:
"... I found it pretty bad when I first saw it, I don't like
a lot of blood spilling about ... right over the top, wasn't
it ... I didn't feel too bright over it ... but I still
thought it was funny ..."(H11,49)
This raises the interesting problem of those respondents who
claimed not to find such a sequence funny but who did laugh. This
is a difficult point to substantiate (cf. footnote 329 above)
without more elaborate non-verbal transcription facilities, but H1,
for instance, did agree to laughing. One laugher ('gelast'), H13,
made no adverse comment about the sequence, noting instead that
"... I suppose it's inevitable that they become, that organs
are ripped out and people explode because ... it's a pro-
gression of ideas ..."(H13,53)
When I pointed out that he particularly seemed to enjoy the aggres-
sive/sadistic humour (for example the rugby match), this respondent
replied laughingly:
"... there could have been ... you haven't got anything here,
... sadomasochism or anything like that ... this question-
naire ..."(H13,62)
In a similar vein, another respondent referred to an episode of
The Young Ones,
"... in which ... Vivian gets decapitated by a train ... his
head falls off, they kick his head around ... when I first
saw it I just rolled around laughing ... it's not as grue-
some as some of this ... but that's ... completely unmoti-
vated ..."(L13,78-79)
There were very few other comments about the general issue of
violent representations in Monty Python. The most explicit was
"... there's lots of unmotivated violence in Monty Python ...
or sort of gruesomeness outside that ... the knight having
his legs and arms chopped off until he's hopping around
spurting blood ... or ... there's like somebody watching TV
and the hand comes out of the TV and pulls someone's eye-
balls out of their socket ... I suppose that is a comment of
sorts but ..."(L13,75)
The gratuitous element was picked up by another respondent:
"I'm sure it's deliberate 'cos you know in the end, when he's
saying what people want to see in the cinema these days is
people with chainsaws cutting people up,	 I'm sure that
was part of it ..."(L23,83)
Several respondents, then, were troubled by the arguably 'grat-
uitous' violence of some sections of Meaning of Life, though this
did not necessarily destroy their enjoyment of those sequences.
d) (iii) the sexual 
Again, we have dealt in earlier sections with the role of the
sexual in the joke-mechanism, with the ways in which sexual humour
can function as an infantile revolt (cf. pp.124-130 & 141-145
above). What did the respondents think of the sexual humour of
Meaning of Life? I have looked especially for references to
material in HAT section 2, which includes the childbirth scene, the
Sperm Song, the Blackitts' discussion of Protestantism, and the sex
education lesson, though clearly other comments may also turn out to
be relevant. Remarks about the more obviously 'ideological' issue
of sexism will be considered later, as will some (tentative) psy-
choanalytic interpretations of the respondents' comments.
There was a considerable degree of agreement that the 'sexual'
sections of the film were the most amusing. Thus for example,
- 349 -
"I think I found the sex one funnier ..."(H5,10)
The group of L6, L22 and L23 agreed. Another respondent
"... liked the sex education lesson one as well ..." (L12,93)
H1 echoed this (4), and also provided one of the more 'personal'
responses to the sexual material. For her, enjoyment of the sexual
sequences was linked to transgression of taboos regarding what could
be expected of representations of the classroom on film or TV.
"... on the one hand it's the taboo, and then ... it comes
near to the crudest fantasies one can have ... that for
example you have sex in the classroom in the widest sense
... this is probably something one way or the other, I have
fantasies about, ... seeing it acted out ... in such a man-
ner that all the ... excitement ..."(H1,3)
Asked why this should evoke a laughter response, the respondent went
"... first of all I felt it was a kind of ... embarrassment
that he said 'the vaginal juices' and how can you produce
them ... and I felt my God ... are they going to talk about
it ... I was a bit embarrassed ... it's ... as if he's
taught geography, or whatever ... and it is the highest
level of feeling that it is a taboo, personal, and that it
is handled in such a businesslike way, that helps me to
laugh about it ... if it was dealt with in a porn way, I
probably would have got fidgety, ..."(H1,3)
Enjoyment, then, was in this case linked to a novel/incongruous way
of addressing a habitually taboo area.
Two other subjects expressed more or less qualified personal
enjoyment of the sexual sections.
"... I think it tends to be rather sexual, overtly sexual and
I think that puts a lot of people off; it doesn't bother me
because I just think it's ... a laugh ..."(H11,49)
In the other case the respondent had greater difficulty convincing
(himself) that he had enjoyed the sexual humour:
"... the sequence in the school where they really talk on
sex; but everything, all the detail, you know, it's like,
you really start, not to feel embarrassed, but you're not
used, you know, to this kind of ... and after, if you accept
- 350 -
it, it's going to be extremely funny, because you imagine
... all those people who repress all these expressions
.../. .. I don't understand all those words you know on sex
for example ... there are words I still don't understand ...
I never saw it when it was subtitled, you know, because ...
so there are still some expressions in the film I just don't
understand ... it's very strange because I don't find that
sequence very very funny, it makes me laugh inside, you know
it doesn't shock me, but I don't feel like laughing like
some other parts of the film ... I don't know, I just can't
... it doesn't shock me at all, I mean, because I do under-
stand that point of view, what they want to do, but I can
understand, if you see it, you know in a big cinema and
audience doesn't respond very much, Bo you can start to feel
embarrassed ..."(L16,65-66)
These examples throw up the problem of according more 'personal'
status to some responses than to others (the latter instance is
quoted in full to illustrate this). One or two respondents appeared
to remain resolutely distanced from their own direct experience,
notably L21 (cf. pg.292 above):
"... the scene with sex, ... the use of actual language was a
bit heavy-handed, a bit explicit, to make the actual ... the
actual sex sort of um comic ... it was too ... serious ..."
(L21,37)
At the same time, he felt that there was a problem with
"... the more sexual ... type of jokes ... which aren't
really that significant in Monty Python films, although it
did crop up quite a bit in here ... they would probably take
in more of the sort ... of crude vulgar type of person of
society, the person who enjoys ... sexual jokes ..."
(L21,39)
Though this respondent would, if pressed, no doubt have agreed
to differentiate among different kinds of sexual humour, others did
in fact make that distinction with regard to Meaning of Life:
"... there are very different levels of attitudes to sex in
the movie; ... on one hand you've got the very explicit dis-
cussion in the class, ... you get kind of saturated with the
stuff, and I think they actually achieved a genuine shocking
capacity somehow ... in the dialogue of that scene to a cer-
tain extent, but then you've got these half-naked women
chasing around, and that's using sex in its very traditional
- 351 -
Carry-on film type of way ... that's one of the problems of
the film, is that they can't quite decide what they're doing
..."(L13,66)
More often comments concentrated on the presence in the film of the
first of these two modes:
"... there's this sense in which Monty Python is sending up
that aspect; it says 'penis' and 'fuck'; it's not saying it
in the spirit with which some of the people who say it find
it funny ..."(L22,87)
The innuendo of Benny Hill was also frequently counterposed to the
kind of sexual humour in Meaning of Life; for example for one
respondent Monty Python could be excused occasional touches of
sexism because
'... they actually poke fun at a hell of a lot of things in
society, so you can't just isolate that; whereas Benny Hill
... takes the 'general line' ... which is, let's poke fun at
women, or let's have a cheap thrill, at women's expense ..."
(L12,101)
And for another
"... for example, Benny Hill ... most of his comedy is based
on sex, but I would sit there and watch it and I wouldn't
laugh at all ..."(L6,86)
This group (L6, L22, L23) spent a little time debating whether
sex is/can be of itself funny. The discussion was a good encapsula-
tion of the interplay between 'personal' and 'detached' modes; but
the comments of L6 in particular are pertinent.
"... sex does tend to be, it always brings laughs, and it
always is ... funny but ... within just that section I
enjoyed the Birth one which I think is less, ... sex-related
than the other sections but ... the other sections were
still slightly funnier than the rest of the film ... I think
sex is so much part of comedy that you can have a bad sexu-
ally-oriented sketch, and you might laugh at it; but ...
it's just another aspect of humour, just because it's sex
doesn't make it more taboo or any more funny ... any more,
anyway, I think ... because it's been dealt with over quite
a lot of things ..."(L6)
When questioned about the apparent contradiction in his previous
statement, L6 replied
"Yes, it does slightly but ... I'll try to clarify that, say
I'm a politician now ... what I meant was ... that quite
often sex is dealt with in comedy and sometimes it's funny,
sometimes it's not, but just the fact that it's sex doesn't
mean that it's necessarily funny ... which I think was the
point ... you were trying to say that ... maybe that people
do react in that way ... so probably it's more likely to be
... dealt humorously with ..."(L6,86)
One of the respondents picked up the historical/cultural relativity
of some sexual humour:
... you were talking about Benny Hill but, going back into
older films, you know Carry On films or whatever, ...
dropped trousers or anything like that, and it's a laugh
lined up ... I think in these jaded days it's not so auto-
matic ..."(L23,86-87)
and L6 related this to expectation:
"I think it depends who says it ... you sort of expect it in
a film like Monty Python, any film like that ... that there
will be some mention of 'penis' or 'fuck' or whatever; but
if somebody who you don't expect to say a word like that
says it, then it can be funny; I think it's expectation as
well ..."(L6,87)
Here we are back in the field of repetition and novelty, and the
comedicity associated with the subversion of taboos.
A number of comments were made, often by respondents who showed
visible signs of enjoyment/laughter (cf. footnote 5 and pg.328
above), about the structure/performance of the sections containing
sexual humour. This may have constituted a kind of displacement of
a more personal response. Thus one respondent said of the Penis
Song,
"... I think it's the way it's done ... because it's done in
that 'Noel Coward' manner, ... if Benny Hill come along and
just sort of sung it, the way someone like Benny Hill would
do it ... it would just be for its own sort of sake, it
would sort of fall flat, but ... the way they go about and
present ... a joke or whatever, it's not just sort of flung
right at you ... it's got a good foundation, ..."(H7,10)
- 353 -
Some comments were more critical; for example one person felt that
some of the ideas needed developing:
"... or keep them going longer, in a lot of cases; I really
enjoyed the ... sex education class .../... very good ...
but it could have had more to it, it could have gone on
longer or it could have been developed ... there were BO
many things like that, it was a great idea and then it would
be backed up ... and then there's be a filler ... like ...
'Every Sperm is Sacred' ... I mean I didn't, I didn't ... I
liked it, I liked it, but I didn't like the song, I thought
the song went on far too long" (L10,28)
On the other hand, there was an opinion (of the Sperm Song sequence)
that one had
"... gone through a whole sequence where they've been talking
about ... sex, not perhaps directly so much but ... in a
roundabout way, and I think people tend to settle, I settle
into a, ... rut, and I say well this is about ... (?)
then I'm looking really for something to shake me out of it
..."(H11,55) (cf. also L5, L12,97 and pg.298 above)
Sexual humour was also discussed by some respondents in terms of
enjoyment of its incongruity (cf. pg.344 above). When I suggested
with one group that the effectivity of the sex-education sequence
was helped by the fact that it was about sex, the response was
"I don't think ... I suppose so, because ... they've taken
the ultimate, which you'd think, ... boys would be inter-
ested in, but in a classroom situation, you turn off ...
whatever it is ..."(H13)
"... that ... almost opens up the sketch, talking about vagi-
nal juices, and I think there's a shock impact in that ...
the headmaster, coming in and leading straight off into
things like that ..."(H11) (54)
As we have seen, another respondent's comment about the Penis Song
was that
"... it wasn't just the mention of the word 'penis' ... no,
it was ... the incongruity, the comedy lies in the incongru-
ity ..."(L13,66)
The separation in psychoanalytic terms between the 'sexual' and
the excremental is fragile. The elusive 'Martin Luther' sequence
would have furnished a suggestive link between the two.
"... it's about sex and going to the toilet ..."(Q,58)
d) (iv) the excremental
Excremental humour (and the 'excremental revolt' more generally)
have been discussed above (pp.125-127 & 143-149 & 165-168). In what
follows, the majority of comments relate to the Mr. Creosote restau-
rant sequence, but there are also a few observations of a more
general nature. It is necessary here to define as 'excremental'
anything which is 'dirty', and in this sense vomiting (and explod-
ing) are excremental activities.35
Altogether fourteen of the sixteen respondents made significant
comments on excremental humour, compared with fifteen who spoke of
sexual humour. This contrasts with twelve who commented on the
absurd/incongruous, and nine who contributed something about 'vio-
lent' humour.
As with the instances of 'violent' humour, there was a consider-
able ambivalence in many of the responses; even those for whom the
vomiting of the Mr. Creosote episode was "too much" had usually
laughed. We shall look at the possible significance of this below.
Similarly, there was also the common mixing of personal responses
and detached observations. A characteristic response of the latter
type came again from L21:
"... there wasn't really that much I would say was exception-
ally funny ... possibly ... the one with the fat man at the
table, basically because it's an attack on the posh people,
... the way that they isolate themselves from the fat person
eating at the table ... it's a bit crude, but the way that
he's being sick ... you don't usually Bee that in a film,
it's original ... funny way of being original ..."(L21,36)
Some found the Mr. Creosote sequence very funny:
"... the scene in the restaurant ... I didn't know how far
they will go ... it make me really laugh and laugh
..."(L16,64)
"... the scene in the restaurant makes me laugh, I don't know
why but it just makes me laugh, maybe because, the total
absurdity of the scene ... they went so far, and for me it's
really incredible ..."(L16,67)
"... I just can't explain it because really it should shock
me ... that enormous person ... first as I say it was a
shock when I (saw) it the first time, I didn't know where
they wanted to go .../... it's only for example the way you
see that woman, she's cleaning and she receives everything
on her back ... I can't explain why it makes me laugh, I've
no idea really ..."(L16,69)
This respondent did later say that
... that's why maybe I laugh, it's more irrational, totally
absurd, ..."(L16,74)
Another respondent had not seen the film before.
"... I'd heard about the sketch ... the expanding man who
blows up, and that was very funny ..."(L5,92)
Another, who had seen it a few times, spoke specifically of the Mr.
Creosote sequence:
"I certainly thought that was the funniest ..."(H11,47)
".. that is certainly the high-point of it ..."(H11,48)
"... every time I look at that, there's some little other bit
that you can see ..."(H11,49)
This in fact contrasts with the reaction of another respondent:
"... I think I remembered ... the Mr. Creosote sketch really
did crease me when I saw it at the cinema, but ... it's one
of those things that you can only laugh like that when you
see it the first time; the second time you know what's hap-
pening so it's not so funny ..."(L6,80)
- 356 -
Another respondent clearly also enjoyed the sequence:
"... the only one I found extremely funny was the man explod-
ing ... I thought that was great ..."(H13,47)
He also showed a very casual/playful attitude to the excremental,
with comments about
"... these wonderful little memories of men exploding and so
forth ..."(H13,58)
and about how some goldfish with a "great trail of shit dangling
from them" (H13,61) would have enhanced the realism of the film. He
was also sure that "everybody would say" that the high point was the
Mr. Creosote sketch (H13,47). Certainly there were some references
to the popularity of the excremental in Monty Python: one person
described how, while watching the film with other students, it had
"... very interesting to see what bits people laughed at ...
and some of the very obvious jokes ... anal humour type
things, there were people that would be ... literally sort
of rolling on the floor ..."(L12,107)
Another had a friend who
"... saw it in France ... he said people were really dying
laughing during that sequence ..."(L16,69)
One respondent who enjoyed the excremental humour, however, had
had a different experience. He had
.os watched it with other people and they've found it abso-
lutely revolting, in fact they've been turned off by the
whole thing ..."(H11,47)
This was echoed by someone in another group:
"... I dreaded that bit ... I remember when I first saw it in
the cinema, the whole cinema going (vomit sound) ... because
it's so horrible It's revolting ..."(L14,93)
There were several reports of a more straightforward dislike for
the Mr. Creosote sequence.
"... I felt quite uneasy with	 that vomiting bit ... when
he vomited onto the cleaning-woman, 	 I felt was a bit too
much ..."(H1,2) (cf. also 111,8)
This respondent's sympathy for the discomfiture of others in the
restaurant (including the cleaning-woman) may indeed have been a
displacement of her own anxieties.
Two other respondents agreed with each other.
"... I didn't like just the sickness ... I didn't find that
at all funny ..."(L17)
"I didn't either	 I just thought it was gross ..."(L10)
Later, the latter respondent added
"... I found that exploding fat man really gross 	 I also
found myself looking ... to see ... exactly how much blood
and guts are they going to give us ... I didn't find that
offensive but I didn't like it either ..."(L10,26)
and the other respondent repeated that she
"... didn't like that whole idea	 it was presumably sup-
posed to be very funny that this guy kept vomiting and
vomiting .../... I suppose that some peoples' ... sense of
humour's a bit more basic than mine, but I mean I can
laugh at slapstick humour as well ... I sometimes do find
jokes about bodily functions funny, sometimes I don't 	 I
mean there just doesn't seem to be anything apart from, that
was the joke, it wasn't in any other context, OK he was
being sick so as he could make room for something else,
there just didn't seem enough to it, ... just was being sick
all the time ..."(L17,27)
One of these two did, however, accept that he had found the
sequence amusing, albeit for other reasons. When challenged about
the fact that he had been laughing, his response was
"... I was laughing at John Cleese, I think ... again.
was laughing at him and I was laughing at the parody
..."(L10,24) (cf. also L10,27)
- 358 -
Another respondent expressed his dislike thus:
"... this one I didn't really get on with. I mean all the,
like the Mr. Creosote sketch, and Live Donations I just find
that ... gore overwhelms any humour in it ..."(L23,80)
"... I found the overwhelming tenor of the gore and the puk-
ing and BO on, just ... overwhelmed by it ..."(L23,81)
He accepted the initial incongruity of the gross Mr. Creosote:
".. someone coming into a plush-looking restaurant and say-
ing things like 'fuck off, I'm full' ..."(L23,82-83)
but drew the line at the vomiting.
".. the idea of people becoming covered in vomit just didn't
get to me at all ..."(L23,83)
Finally, there was criticism of the sequence from a respondent
who was otherwise warmly positive about Monty Python. Asked whether
Mr. Creosote was "the funniest sketch", her response was
"No, I didn't think that was the funniest .. it was so
revolting, ... you don't even like to look at it, for fear
of ..."(L12,92)
Almost immediately she went on:
"... I thought it was very funny but I thought it was quite
revolting, it was a kind of horror, ... a kind of mixture of
'yeucch' dread and I actually felt quite nauseous at one
point ... I thought if he pukes again I really, I can't look
because it's making me want to vomit actually ..."(L12,92)
When I pointed out that she had still been laughing during the
sequence, she replied:
"... but it was laughing at the horror, ... the horrific kind
of revoltingness ..."(L12,92)
We shall return to this and other similar remarks below when we
reflect on why the respondents said what they said.
d) (v) sexism, racism, and the socially tendentious 
We can begin by noting the sheer volume of discussion generated
in this area; there has consequently been a greater need to con-
dense, to select the most pertinent comments. I propose to concern
myself mainly with the instances of arguably sexist/racist humour
in Meaning of Life, though on several occasions respondents did talk
much more broadly about these issues. L5, L12 and L14, for example,
engaged in a substantial discussion about sexism and humour, taking
up a number of examples unconnected with Monty Python. For details
of this and other material, cf. Appendix 4.
It will be as well, also, to reaffirm that ideology is pervasive
stuff (cf. pp.14 ff. & 308-311 above), and that we shall here be
dealing with respondents' comments about a fairly limited part of
the 'ideological'. We must also bear in mind the distinction
between definitions of ideology as unconscious (cf. especially
pp.131-135 above) and the realm of conscious opinion, of offence
caused by particular kinds of representations.
Before looking at specifically (arguably) sexist/racist elements
in the humour of Meaning of Life, let us consider briefly some
other/more general observations made by the respondents. A good
introductory remark may be
"Everything that's comic could be perceived as offensive
..."(L21,44)
- or, to paraphrase in Freudian terms, all jokes are tendentious
(cf. pg.111). To recognize this may, however, bear no relation to
'real' lived experience; the same respondent felt that
- 360 -
"... depends on the individual ... for myself I don't really
care what actually gets shown ... it's only a film ... I
don't think you should really take material that seriously
..."(L21,45)
Several respondents did identify the possibility of offence.
"I was with somebody who I think objected to particular ...
things like the, you know the baby dropping at the beginning
and that kind of thing ... she found it kind of sexist,
offensive in a number of ways ..."(L13,65)
"... but I can understand, like ... in the 'Third World', the
Third World called Yorkshire ... I found it funny but it's,
it can be offensive, I can understand ..."(L16,70)
"I found that funny, and I'm from Yorkshire" (L13,70)
Another, who had found the Upper-Class Twit of the Year sketch in
And Now For Something Completely Different funny although she felt
it discriminated against handicapped people,
n ... didn't really find anything discriminating ... against
... well, not this 'Jews' sequence ... nor women ... OK
this scene, but it was not overtly discriminating against
... of course you could say that for example this 'All
Sperms Are Sacred' ... you could call it discriminating
..."(H1,7)
Two other respondents indicated less sympathy for anyone offended by
the humour at the expense of religion:
"... going back to the sperm, and the irate god, I'm expect-
ing this ... to really lay into the Catholics, ... but he
lets them off very gently ... shame ... (to H11:) you're not
a Catholic are you?"(H13,55-56)
"... any poking at religion is always good for a laugh with
mel"(L23,85)
Another respondent, who had earlier said he had "no strong feelings"
(H7,13) about representations of women in Meaning of Life, felt
there "could be quite a few things"(H7,16) which could be objection-
able to various people. His partner remembered that a friend had
found the use of children for the 'Sperm Song' sketch shocking and
agreed that the undermining of childrens"innocence' could be
"upsetting for a lot of people, especially parents" (H5,17).
There was a great deal of debate, of varying degrees of complex-
ity, about whether certain representations/elements in Meaning of
Life/Monty Python were sexist. One respondent, referring to the
hospital sequence, said
"... a couple of women (I know felt (?)) disturbed by the ...
the way that she's just taken for granted and not given any
... special attention ..."(L21,45)
When I contrasted this sequence, where the lack of care accorded the
woman is arguably being ridiculed, with the (gratuitously 'aggres-
sive') way in which the female figure is impregnated in the 'Prome-
nade through the stars' song, he responded
... anyone who felt disturbed by that image, I would have
thought would have been more towards the sort of feminist
area ... sort of tread carefully here ... they're actually
being used rather, not as a person but more for, to sort of
give birth ..."(L21,45)
Some remarks were concerned with the representations of women in
the original TV series.
... the only real woman in it was Carol Cleveland, who'd
sort or come on as a dumb pin-up type, I remember there was
a lot of controversy with the first series that the images
of women were all highly dubious ..."(L23,90)
More subtly,
"... it's a bit tricky, ... like, the old ones with Carol
Cleveland, she's always like the busty sort of secretary,
but there she's so over the top, it's almost taking the
mickey of people who ... do the sexist things, ... it's sort
of borderline ..."(H5,13)
Although
"I never thought that Monty Python was particularly noted for
its feminist tendency; ... the Crimson Assurance one, where
there's a woman, she's sent to put the kettle on; I noticed
that ..."(L14,98)
- 362 -
many of our respondents seemed, like L12, to have at least partly
'trusted' Monty Python, and may have agreed that
"... it is a question of how much you trust them in terms of
the other social comment that comes from the other sketches
... speaking as somebody who's a feminist, I suppose I could
say I presume you do trust them; if I didn't, I wouldn't
find them funny, in the way that I don't find Benny Hill
funny ..."(L12,101)
Though one or two implied that the sequence did not bother them
(L10 1 L17, 26-27), L10's precise answer to the question "is there a
problem with some of the gags?" was
"... yes there is and at the same time I just kind of let it
go by ..."(L10,26)
A lively debate about the cleaning-woman incident took place in
most of the discussion groups. For one respondent the incipient
sexism was removed, or at least complicated, by the fact that the
cleaning-woman was played by one of the Pythons (H13,57). A poten-
tially crucial point for a number of respondents was the fact that
this was Terry Jones in drag. Did this work against the potential
sexism of the scene? One person implied it did not:
"... always this thing with Monty Python as well that many of
the major women characters are ... I'm not sure which two it
is in drag, I'm sure that's ... to do with their sexist
attitudes ..."(L23,89)
For some it did.
H ... if it would have been an actual female playing that
role, it would have been more of an attack, more explicit;
as it's a man playing a woman, you see it more as comedy
rather than attacking a certain part of society ... although
it is attacking a certain part of society ... if they would
have had an old cleaner then you would have felt sympathy
possibly for what she was saying ... also would have felt
sympathy or shock at a bucket being put over her head, but
as it's somebody obviously in drag, ..."(L21,47)
More succinctly,
"... you look at them and you see they're men dressed up,
they're not really meant to be representing women
..."(L17,26)
Another woman noted that
"... they dress up as women a lot .. and I don't find that
objectionable, ... at all ..."(L12,99)
and later qualified her reaction of shock at Mr. Creosote vomiting
over the cleaning-woman with
"... she was getting, getting it, then I thought well hang on
a minute, that's a man dressed up as a woman ... I mean I
wouldn't actually call them sexist ..."(L12) (101)
L23 would not have been convinced:
"... Bo it's all right for men in drag to portray women as
stupid and ugly ..."(L23,90)
The comments of one respondent were interesting in their ration-
alist refusal of the complexities of the unconscious:
"If you had a film which say had a male cleaner ... I
wouldn't sort of pinpoint on the vomiting bit, 'cos I don't
think he's attacking women, he's not vomiting on her because
she's a woman, ... but in a film which attacks social con-
vention, ... to enhance the comedy, you have to show things
which ... people perceive as things around them in society
... the stereotyped roles; if it was a man being vomited on,
in a cleaner's clothes, it might not be so funny, I'm not
saying it's funny because it's a woman, it might not be so
funny because you're not able to see it as an actual social
thing ... if Bay like it was a 50:50 place in society, where
there was 50% male cleaners, 50% female cleaners, than you
could decide whether you wanted a male or a female cleaner,
but ... the problem with society is that there's a signifi-
cant majority of female cleaners, so I think you have to
depict a female cleaner ..."(L21,45-46)
"... I didn't actually perceive any attack on a female, or I
didn't also perceive she was on her knees, I just saw that
she was on her knees cleaning; I didn't see she was on her
knees, she was being attacked, vomited on; ... in compari-
son, ... Mildred Pierce, at the end of that, you have those
two ladies ... it's made obvious that they're attacking the
female role in society ... it's actually put there to sort
of show that the women are trodden down ... things like
that, which, it's not being shown in the Monty Python film
..."(L21,46)
The point about 'reflecting social reality' was also taken up by
- 364 -
another respondent, who was concerned about why opposition to sexism
(for instance) always had to be signposted:
"... what the Python team are doing here, they're saying
'let's give it our veto', 'we disapprove of such state-
ments'; now ... do they have to do this all the time; if you
raise an issue in a film, like abuse of women, or anything
sexist, do you have to say, 'I disagree with that, I dis-
agree with that'; ... you can show an example of this, can't
you, why does somebody have to say 'Oh that's bad isn't it?
.../... it certainly doesn't encourage any things which ...
most right-thinking people would be against, does it ... I
mean it doesn't encourage abuse of women ..."(H13,57)
The other generally agreed 'cause for concern' in Meaning of 
Life was the chase sequence in the 'Death of Arthur Jarrett' section
of 'Death'. (I was unable to interest anyone in my concern with the
animation sequence depicting a woman's impregnation: "I didn't mind
that, I thought it was quite good"(L17,27)). In this sequence, a
group of young bare-breasted women chase the convicted Arthur
Jarrett to his death.
"I felt a bit ... they could have chosen another ... because
it said, this victim could choose his own way of dying, and
so he could have chosen anything else, but he chose the sex-
ist way ..."(H1,1)
Though it is true that this respondent needed to be reminded exactly
what Arthur Jarrett's offence had been ("Making gratuitous sexist
jokes in a moving picture"), she still felt that, as actually
filmed,
"... it's just ... reinforcing the joke, or making the joke
visual what he's accused of ..."(H1,1-2)
Others agreed.
"... that concerns me a bit .../... I found that possibly the
more uncomfortable part, because I couldn't actually see
what the point of that was ... I found that a bit discon-
certing ..."(H11,57-58)
"... well that is harder ... they were actually self-
consciously saying, weren't they, the reason he ... died was
- 365 -
for actually doing a sexist joke ..."(L12,98) (cf. also
L6,89)
On one level the sequence can be 'excused' because the sexist
images are diegetically motivated.
"... having said that this guy was guilty of the making of a
gratuitously sexist joke, it then gives them the excuse to
have shots of women, boobs flying all over the place, so
perhaps that's giving them the licence ... if they hadn't
had that beforehand, you'd think mm, nasty sexist imagery,
... but because he's chosen it as his punishment
..."(L23,89)
As another respondent put it,
"... I think ... they're covering themselves ..."(H13,58)
This was endorsed elsewhere:
"... if they hadn't said that bit about what he's been sen-
tenced for; if he'd been sentenced for robbing a bank or
something, then I would have thought ... Benny Hill again,
... sexist stuff, but because they put that in, he's been
sentenced for gratuitous ... sort of made it, ... I didn't
mind that there were loads of naked women running across ...
'cos then it was taking the mickey out of ... sexist things
..."(H5,13)
Some, however, were not satisfied with this argument. We have
seen that H1 was unimpressed, and another respondent felt that
"... there again, it's through his eyes, that is very much
his fantasy ... the film's not really saying women are like
this ... I didn't like the camera shot on the woman's ...
breasts going up and down, but again, ... the excuse, it's
supposed to be this man's fantasy ..."(L17,26-27)
One person wondered:
"... are they actually joining the bandwagon, that's what's a
bit difficult ..."(L12,101)
A good summary of the problem had already been offered earlier in
the same discussion:
"... they're putting their own sort of safety net ..."(L5,98)
The chief instance of 'racist' humour was identified as the
'cleaning-woman"s remark "at least I never worked for Jews" in the
aftermath of the Mr. Creosote sketch; 36 only one person referred to
Terry Gilliam's introduction to the Middle of the Film:
"... a guy walks on in a Zulu suit, unzips it and it is in
fact an immaculate white guy in a suit, and then speaks with
a, with an African accent; which I didn't think was funny,
... it even crossed my mind, ... that maybe I shouldn't be
laughing at it ... but I found it quite ... ingenious,
clever. But not necessarily funny, I don't think I did find
it funny ..."(L22,89)
Many respondents picked the 'cleaning-woman' part of the Mr.
Creosote sequence as potentially objectionable, but responses were
in fact quite varied. One person was not shocked, but could not
understand why (L16,72-73). Another identified 'laziness' as a
reason for accepting' racist humour:
"... It's too much effort to sort of say in a group of
people, oh I object to that joke, so you sort of smile ...
it's an easy way out, ... and at the time, perhaps you don't
really think about it, it's just 'a joke' ... you don't
think till afterwards, you know, I don't really like ...
calling someone a Paki, ... it's a mixture of things, ...
sort of an easy way out ... you'd rather not go against the
grain ..."(H5,14)
The respondent who had argued strongly that Mr. Creosote vomiting
over the cleaner-woman was not an "attack on women" did say that
"... they attack Jewish people ... as well ... which they did
in that as well ..."(L21,44),
- a reference to Life of Brian. Only one respondent said that the
punishment of a bucket of vomit was enough to legitimate the 'joke':
"... the part at the end of the Creosote scene, where the
cleaning lady's talking about ... ends up 'at least I don't
work for Jews' ... but then that's totally defused because
the bloke's shocked and horrified, tips a bucket up over her
..."(H11,56)
Asked "but does that make if completely OK?" the response was
"I think so, yes ..."(H11,56)
- 367 -
The co-respondent (H13) agreed with this, and Hll went on:
"... someone doesn't approve of it, ... there's someone in
there who you can actually sort of label if you like as
establishment, the ... head waiter, in a posh restaurant,
and he's ... shown that he's offended ..."(H11,56-57)
It may be interesting that no-one remarked that the person who made
(and was punished for) the racist remark was none other than the
'woman' over whom Mr. Creosote had earlier been sick.
It may also be more interesting, however, to point out that no
fewer than three respondents had faulty recollection of the "I never
worked for Jews" incident. One (L21,47) simply said he did not
remember the line, but another described the scene thus:
"... suddenly she is talking, she was at the Prado and the
British Museum and the Academie Frangaise, and the other one
is probably ... the waiter has got fed up, and he put all
the ... that's why I laugh, ... because ... she's just doing
some cheap philosophy, ..."(L16,77)
When I interjected "well, no, it's because she says 'I never worked
for Jews'", his response began simply and laughingly, "... yes,
I ... I know ..."(L16,77). The oddest recollection came when a
Jewish respondent identified the potentially racist comment:
"... the woman who's talking about leaving the British Museum
and working for a dirty Jew ..."(L6,89)
When I pointed out that these were not the cleaning-woman's words,
he continued
"... it's all right, I can say it, 'cos I'm Jewish ... work-
ing for a Jew, sorry, I didn't mean to be bad shit, it's the
dirty vomit compared to ... obviously they were trying to
say something about it ..."(L6,89)
Whether this respondent was 'really' offended or not, we cannot
say. This simply seems the appropriate point at which to record
another respondent's experience with an episode of The Young Ones:
- 368 -
"... I've shown that to a few people, who were really
offended by some of it ... Alexei Sayle does various sort of
impersonations ... there's a South African one, ... Alexei
Sayle, in the last episode, does an impersonation of a
Jewish landlord, he kind of comes in, he slashes up all the
furniture, and charges them 200 ... I sort of laughed along
with it, but I showed it to a couple of Jewish people, and
... they were actually really pissed off by this
..."(L13,79)
One possible 'defence' against allegations of racist/sexist
humour in Monty Python TV programmes and films is to argue that the
group have consistently 'attacked' everything and everyone, or at
least a wide spectrum of targets. We are back here with the notion
of balance.
One respondent referred to Terry Jones' portrayal of women:
"... you could say that Terry Jones is ... debasing women,
... there's always the fag, and the curlers ... but there
again when you had that Protestant scene, you had, like Gra-
ham Chapman ... saying, 'I can go down and buy a wotsit' and
she's going 'why don't you, why don't you', and it makes him
out to be a real twit, so ... it's then taking the mickey
out of a bloke that could be like that ... so I think the
balance ... you don't get angry, because you think well,
it's balanced, somehow ... and you get the stupid army
people ... they make the blokes in the army as twits, so it
sort of balances it up, it's not all against women ...
really they poke fun at everyone and anyone that ... they
can think of, ..."(H5,14)
For another,
"... the main thrust of their humour always seemed to be
anti-establishment, so it was always picking on the army and
public-school headmasters and figures of the Establishment;
... there's always that sort of check and balance, ... like
'Private Eve', kind of have a go at everything,
..."(L12,100)
"... they actually poke fun at a hell of a lot of things in
society, so you can't just isolate that ..."(L12,101) (cf.
also L21,46)
Speaking in a different way of the hospital sequence, another
respondent was saying much the same thing:
- 369 -
"... all the good ingredients, sort of irreverence ... just
the way they sort of ridiculed the system, the hospital sys-
tem, and the doctors and the Establishment ... a little bit
of gore ... not too much, ... just right, a good mixture of
things ..."(L6,84)
Three respondents in pursuit of equilibrium pointed out that the
cleaning-woman was not alone in being subjected to Mr. Creosote's
vomit.
"... and also John Cleese was getting splattered, wasn't he
..."(L12,101) (L5 agreed) (cf. also L21,46 and H11,57)
We have noted the scepticism of one respondent (L5) regarding
the possibility of any radical satire or criticism given the back-
ground of the Monty Python team; this respondent would presumably
have viewed the notion of 'balance' with suspicion. One other
person did voice reservations, though from a slightly different
perspective:
"... this film was rather unconvincingly striving for balance
or something ... I mean, people kept kicking around Bunuel
as a kind of comparison when this came out ... but when they
are going to criticise Catholicism they have to put a balan-
cing critique of Protestantism, which I didn't think was
that funny, ... I could almost see them thinking, we can't
get away with this, we've got to have, ... the balancing
statement is there; also there's this peculiar sort of com-
ment at the end where they were ... trying to excuse them-
selves by making that statement about 'let's have lots of
pictures of penises so we can get the shock-value', ... kind
of incorporate what may well have been their strategy, in a
way, into the film ..."(L13,70)
An interesting balance-related comment was made by one respon-
dent about the Sperm Song sequence:
"... they're also taking the mickey out of the working-class
man, ... a kind of classist thing ..."(L12,99)
This led to a consideration of 'classism' which was entirely con-
fined to this particular group. The same respondent admitted that
- 370 -
"... in talking about sexism and that I think what I'm saying
is, it's a classist thing ..."(L12,99)
to which another replied
"... I could object
babies being born .
and all that ... I
Yorkshire person ..
annoys me, but ...
themselves being a
very very pampered
quite easily to that sketch, with the
.. you know, too thick for contraception
could object, basically because I'm a
. I could be so upset ... it sort of
it comes back to ... are they aware of
bit stupid .../... but they do it from a
position ..."(L5,99-100)
This group did, however, agree about the 'anti-classist' potential
of the Jean-Paul Sartre sketch in one of the TV episodes:
"... which in fact ... could be said to work against the sort
of classist notions of ignorance and so on ... apparently
really sort of ... progressive ..."(Q,108)
There was, then, an ambivalent response to the issues of sexism
and racism (and 'classism'). Comedic elements raising these ques-
tions were readily identified by many respondents, but most could
not help giving way to pleasurable response. One comment can stand
as an effective summary.
"... obviously they were trying to say something about it ...
trying to bring in something to do with racism, sexism,
within the humour ... they were almost maybe making ... a
statement ... even though they were stooping to the levels
of racism and sexism, they were saying that it was maybe
slightly wrong ... but that doesn't mean that they're not
exploiting it ..."(L6,89)
e) Shock-value, 'smut' and the comedic 
We dealt in an earlier section (pp.127-130 & 140-143) with the
role of 'smut', of the obscene, in the comedic. The distinctions
between sexual, excremental and violent material in relation to
smut/shock did not emerge very strongly in the discussions, and
indeed in view of the primary nature of the repressions involved
those distinctions may not be particularly relevant.
Can 'smut' be funny independently of a comedic context? It is
worth noting that although I posed the question (at least once) with
most groups, the majority of respondents had trouble engaging with
it. There was, though, certainly some recognition that sex in
particular is exploited for comedic effect:
"... it depends on the way that the material's being
exploited .../... possibly the more sort of teenage type of,
exploitation of skin .../... with those sort of teenage
films, the only reason is to exploit male and female geni-
talia or whatever ..."(L21,41)
We have already considered above (pp.343-344) some remarks on this
subject, including
".. sex does tend to be, it always brings laughs, and it
always is ... funny .../... sex is so much a part of comedy
that ... you can have a sort of bad sexually-oriented
sketch, and you might laugh at it; ... it's just another
aspect of humour, just because it's sex doesn't make it any
more taboo or any more funny ... any more anyway ..."L6,85)
Already, then, there is the notion that the 'smut' has to be
exploited in the right way for it to be amusing. For one respon-
dent,
"... if the humour has been a bit sophisticated and then sud-
denly joke is dropped in, like bodily function or whatever,
it is funny just for the ... contrast of what's gone before,
the sheer unexpectedness ..."(L17,28)
This is similar to another respondent's view of Monty Python rude-
ness:
"... they like to set up their upper-class, ... army types
... who then swear or ... (?) bottoms or whatever it is,
then you get the cheap laugh of it, ..."(L12,116)
The viewing/reception context is also a factor in whether 'smut'
'works' or not. While it "depends of the individual"(L21,44), it
"... depends who you're actually watching the material with,
if you're viewing it in a group of, ... half a dozen male
people, ... possible you can see the material different
..."(L21,41)
Another respondent implied much the same thing:
"... I liked it a lot better this time than when I first saw
it in a cinema, ... because I went with someone who really
didn't like it and objected to its (crudity), and I picked
up on that ..."(L13,64)
More often however, the respondents were either silent or
critical about the funniness of smut. One respondent was uneasy:
".. it's very strange, because I don't find that sequence
very very funny, it make me laugh inside .../... if you see
it, you know in a big cinema and the audience doesn't
respond very much, you can start to feel embarrassed, I can
(have) this feeling ..."(L16,66)
Denial of the comedic effectiveness of smut was occasionally accom-
panied - we have observed this 'displacement' in the sections above
(pp.345-359) on violent, sexual and excremental humour - by an
emphasis on the factor (performance or incongruity, for example)
which 'explained' why the respondent laughed. Thus, asked whether
it was possible to laugh at smut on its own, at the mention of
'penis' at the start of the Penis Song, one person replied
"... no, no, it's got to, ... like Eric Idle and his Noel
Coward ... because you know that Noel Coward would never
sing about things like that, that it makes it funny
..."(H13,53)
It may well be significant, though, that this respondent remained
noticeably mirthful throughout this part of the discussion, and
laughed most volubly at his own contrast between "... Noel Coward's
voice and a song about dicks1"(H13,54). Another comment about the
same scene was
".. part of it would be ... the character that you recognize,
that you don't hear in that situation, doing that; ..."(L6)
"... I think most of the humour is over the audience's reac-
tion 'Oh, what a witty song' ..."(L23) (88)
There was also quite a variety of reaction to 'rude' language
and swearing. Outside Monty Python, one respondent remembered an
older example:
"... that song with Flanders and Swann, with the rude words
in it, you know "pee-po, belly-bum draws" ... and they'd
sing ... no, no this was years ago ..."(L14,95)
Three sessions included some discussion of Derek and Clive. 37 One
respondent remembered that
H oos I used to find everything funny and they do ... a lot of
sketches about cancer and they really are quite horrific,
... but I used to, ... I found it hysterically funny
..."(H5,17-18)
"... the swearing and everything I found ... hysterically
funny, I could spend just hours just killing myself laugh-
ing, just because there it was like one swearword after
another, but now I mean a couple of years later or whatever,
unless it's just me that's changed ... it's almost ...
swearing isn't funny any more ..."(H5,19)
Though 'growing up' is clearly a factor here, this does contrast
nicely with her partner's observation that
"... I've never found that as funny ... as Monty Python ...
I've always found it a bit sort of gratuitous of swearing
and all sorts of things ..."(H7,19)
Another respondent used the familiar device of ignoring/bypassing
the language of Derek and Clive and stressed other reasons for his
enjoyment:
"... the humour in it, for me, wasn't the sexual aspect, it
was other things; the only sketch I can remember is, they're
two football supporters saying 'Do you know I saw Nobby the
other day and he called me a fucking cunt' 'No Fucking
cunt/ So what did you do?' 'Oh I called him a fucking
- 374 -
cunt' 'Quite right ...' ... all that showed was like the
impoverishment of language when people just say that the
whole time ... I don't think it's the sort of sexual aspect
that's coming out there ..."(L23,87)
Returning to Meaning of Life, the respondent who had once found
Derek and Clive BO funny did not find the "couldn't you have your
balls cut off?" line in the Sperm Song sequence funny, but did enjoy
the reference to 'vaginal juices' in the sex-education lesson:
"... the one about the vaginal juices, that made me laugh,
but I think that's because it was John Cleese saying it
..."(H5,10)
There were other positive responses to the 'rude' language in
Monty Python. Thus, speaking of the TV programmes, one respondent
"... just thought that it was ... quite exciting ... it was
naughty ..."(L5)
.. what because of the ... explicit language ..."(L12)
"... yes, ... it was quite a grown-up humour ..."(L5)
(112-113)
"... there's this sense in which Monty Python is sending up
that aspect; it says 'penis' and 'fuck'; it's not saying it
in the spirit with which some of the people who say it find
it funny ..."(L22,87)
Referring to Meaning of Life, another person spoke of Mr. Creosote:
"... the fact that he's so obnoxious, and the swearing's
actually funny ..."(H5,9)
A few respondents, on the other hand, were not so impressed.
"... the scene with sex, ... the use of actual language was a
bit heavy-handed, a bit explicit, to make the actual ... the
actual sex sort of um comic ..."(L21,37)
"... remember the point we were making about rude words ... I
didn't mean that there wasn't some value in it but I think
some people deliberately use that, just to shock, they say
look, I'm being terribly avant-garde, I'm using
..."(L14,115)
Both 'avant-garde language' and visual images can be invested
with 'shock-value'. 38 To what extent can funniness depend on
shock-value?
The effectiveness of an element of shock in Meaning of Life was
evoked and recognized by several respondents.
"... with the leg, with this ... that was raw meat ... at
first I was shocked, I thought 'oargh' really"(H1,5)
"... talking about vaginal juices ... I think there's a shock
impact ..."(H11,54)
Speaking of the sex-education lesson, one respondent felt that
"... they actually achieved a genuine shocking capacity some-
how in that ..."(L13,66)
Another referred to
... the impact or the shock of the idea that if you've got a
kidney card then someone's going to come and take your kid-
neys ..."(L23,80)
Referring to the same sequence, another response was
"... I can think of lots of people who would just be ... it's
very difficult because in a sense if the film's justifica-
tion is to shock, ... perhaps they're the people on whom it
works most effectively ..."(L13,71)
Some associated shock with the 'new', the 'unexpected' (cf.
pp.320-321 above). Asked why she laughed so much at the sex-
education lesson, one respondent replied
"... I wouldn't have expected ... that you could say some-
thing like that on television or in a film ... leave alone
in a classroom ..."(H1,2)
Similarly,
"... you don't expect that to be said at that point ... it
comes out very very suddenly and very very surprisingly
..."(H13,57)
In a debate about Ben Elton's ideological purity, two respondents
made much the same point:
- 376 -
"... I'd like to think I was shocked because I wasn't expect-
ing even Ben Elton to do it here, on television ..."(L5,93)
".. there's a shock element of menstruation, periods being
mentioned for the first time by Ben Elton ... on a live pro-
gramme ..."(L12,104)
For some respondents shock-value had always been an essential
component of Monty Python. One regretted the fact that 'shocking'
material had been appropriated, had become commonplace:
"... they set the whole thing off, really ... and therefore
now you've had all what's come since, and recently there's
like The Young Ones ... Filthy Rich and Catnap, that sort
of thing, therefore ... when you go back to this sort of
humour it doesn't have the shock-value it had originally
..."(L12,94)
Some diagnosed in more recent Monty Python films an increased and
more deliberate aim to shock.
"... they've now gone all out it appears to shock a large
number of the ... audience ..."(H11,52)
"... trying to kind of excuse themselves by making that
statement about "let's have lots of pictures of penises so
we can get the shock-value", ... kind of incorporate what
may well have been their strategy, in a way ... into the
film ..."(L13,70)
Another saw the increased will to shock as natural/inevitable.
"... I think they've always, ... tried to shock ... or sur-
prise, or whatever ... I suppose it's inevitable that ...
organs are ripped out and people explode because otherwise,
... it's a progression of ideas, you've got to, otherwise
people, ... are no longer going to be surprised or shocked
..."(H13,53)
Only three respondents, however, explicitly addressed the link
between shock and laughter, the fact that shock can produce enjoy-
ment.
"... I think it's that shock thing as well, isn't it 'cos you
say, ... he just sort of ... pukes up everywhere, and ...
you're quite shocked ... I don't know if you're embarrassed
'cos you think oh, he's being sick, and you immediately
laugh, like a sort of an embarrassed laugh almost ... and
- 377 -
then you do begin to find it funny, but the first reaction
you sort of think oh, I better laugh ..."(H5,18)
One respondent had seen the Sperm Song on TV as part of a review:
"... I realized I'd seen it reviewed on Barry Norman's Film
eighty-whatever, ... I remember watching it ... laughing at
that, but ... again it's the shock factor ..."(L12,93)
Of the Mr. Creosote sequence, another said simply
"... well, you laugh because you're shocked ..."(L14,92)
On the whole, then, the respondents seem to have been fairly
sceptical about the possibility of smut being inherently funny. They
also generally recognized the presence of shock-value in Meaning of
Life while, for the most part, denying its funniness.
The central problem of whether a shock-effect can be effected by
repeated use of the same kind of material was raised by one respon-
dent:
"... the idea of the shockingness of certain subject-matter
... this has always been around, that if they depend on the
shockingness of the certain subject matter, ... once it's
been expressed, once someone's dared to say it, that's taken
away all the value; if that's all they're depending on
..."(L14,95)
"... if that is what is supposed to be funny, the sheer
shock-value, of saying something that's not normally said on
television, I think, you know, it's bound to diminish each
time it's used ... if that is the pure reason ..."(L14,96)
We are back now in the realm of repetition (cf. pp.330-331 & 335-339
above), of the cotton-reel that keeps coming back, of our old friend
the unconscious.
f) Psychoanalysis: repression and catharsis
It became axiomatic in Sections 1-5 of this thesis that where
sexual/excremental comedic material is found to be funny, the
amusement represents a cathartic release of libidinal energy. This
energy is habitually (uneconomically) blocked off by a particular
individual's system of repressions. Moreover, since laughter at a
sexually tendentious joke releases a quota of repressed energy but
does nothing about the (sexual) anxieties which keep the repression
in place, there seems no reason (other than a desire for 'novelty')
why the repeated use of the same or similar material should not
continue to provide a measure of cathartic release. How did the
comments made by the respondents tally with such a model? The
material which follows will overlap with, but hopefully also dig a
little deeper than, the earlier subsection on 'uncomfortable mate-
rial, release and inhibition' (pp.308-311 above). There will also
be a link forward with the analysis of some of the questionnaire
items and the HAT sheets below. It will be as well to repeat one
last time that it cannot be a question of 'psychoanalysing' the
respondents
We can recall some instances of respondents' references to the
laughter of shock or horror.
"... well, you laugh because you're shocked ..."(L14,92)
"... it was laughing at the horror, it was the horrific
..."(L12,92)
"... yes, but it's revolting at the same time ..."(L12)
"... I think ... it is a defensive type of laughter ..."(L14)
"... a lot of laughter in that was a kind of defensive exor-
cism kind of laughter ... and certainly when you start talk-
ing about things like, ... Chainsaw Massacre, ... the laugh-
ter is a response ... that prevents you, you know exorcises
fear ..."(L13,75)
Bearing in mind the above distinction (cf. footnote 359) with
regard to shock, we may note at length one respondent's notable
insistence on not being shocked (by Meaning of Life); at the same
time he was bemused about why this should be so:
"... it makes me laugh inside, you know it doesn't shock me,
but, I don't feel like laughing like some other parts of the
film ... I don't know, I just can't ... it doesn't shock me
at all .../... if you see it, ... in a big cinema and the
audience doesn't respond very much, you can start to feel
embarrassed ..."(L16,66)
"... no, I just can't explain it because really it should
shock me but ... that enormous person coming inside the res-
taurant, ... it was a shock when I (saw) it the first time,
I didn't know where they wanted to go, and I said OK it's,
John Cleese, French waiter, all the clich gs ... all right
... and after, ... the way for example you see that woman,
she's cleaning and she receives everything on her back ... I
don't know, I can't explain why it makes me laugh, I've no
idea really ..."(L16,69)
"... I laugh, I will laugh but, I do appreciate the ... I
don't know, it's difficult to explain why it doesn't shock
me ..."(L16,72-73)
"... that scene in the restaurant, you would start to be, you
would walk out, or you would be disgusted, and you should be
disgusted ... there is nothing more ..."(L16,75)
Despite the apparently unconscious repetition of the "I know I
should be shocked" motif, this particular respondent did show some
awareness that laughter could be a means of coping with embarrass-
ment and with the horrific:
"... at one moment you don't know if you have to laugh or
not, and suddenly, ... you have to laugh because if you
don't laugh, either you are frightened or ... you leave
..."(L16,74)
Though certainly not clearly articulated, this respondent's comments
did at least show an appreciation of the ludic effectiveness of the
- 380 -
grotesque/tendentious sections of Meaning of Life. The same
appreciation was lacking in some other responses:
"... that sort of gore overwhelms any humour in it ... I find
all the spurting tomato ketchup gets a bit overwhelming
..."(L23,80)
.. I found the ... overwhelming tenor of the gore and the
puking and so on, ... overwhelmed by it ..."(L23,81)
"... idea of people becoming covered in vomit just didn't get
to me at all ..."(L23,83)
Another person in the same group said of the Live Organ Transplant
sequence:
"... much as I quite often tend to laugh at those things, I
didn't for that one ..." (L6,83)
Our most 'distanced' respondent again provided conflicting
answers. On the one hand, he was fairly confident that
"... I've Been the film before ... also I'm slightly more
hardened to ... the more provocative material"(L21,42)
On the other hand, he immediately went on to admit that
"... I'm more sort of repulsed by the imagery ... I feel it
could be my insecurity ..."(L21,42)
This was already a reprise of an earlier exchange on the same
subject (cf. pg.347 above). The same respondent also proposed,
challengingly, that
"... in the past I don't think I've ever experienced (release
through comedy) ..."(L21,42)
A more common type of response, however, reflected the combina-
tion of repulsion and (involuntary) amusement. Thus one respondent
"(didn't) like a lot of blood spilling about ... right over
the top, wasn't it ... but I still thought it was funny
..."(H11,49)
In this and one or two other cases no psychological or psychoana-
lytic model was articulated. One respondent in particular was
- 381 -
strikingly 'innocent' about his enjoyment of excremental and sexual
humour. A number of his comments were punctuated by laughter as he
recalled - and embroidered - favourite moments from the film:
"... every time he pukes into the bucket, you still laugh,
... it's very very strange, why you do ... (laugh-
ter)"(H13,50)
Indeed there were points (e.g. Appendix 4 pg. 54) where he was
struggling to contain his mirth when someone else was talking about
a particular sketch.
Some respondents, however, did (frequently without prompting)
produce tentative speculations about what underlay the enjoyment.
"... probably like the times you laugh and there's really a
deep-rooted reason ... somebody had to probably work out
with you what it is, ... like you were saying about Mr.
Creosote sketch, perhaps it is something deeper that just
..."(H5,18)
Speaking of his enjoyment of a Young Ones episode in which the
others play football with Vivian's severed head, one person said he
"... rolled around laughing ... it's not as gruesome as some
of this ... but that's kind of completely unmotivated ... I
don't know, I've got very dubious unconscious motives ...
(for liking that) ...m(L13,79)
Laughter as defence and as relief tended to merge for some
respondents. Thus one described how he tends to
"... look for thing that are funny, ... perhaps unfortunate
situations, ... maybe it is for that reason though, as well,
so I don't ... hurt myself ..."(H7,16)
and shortly afterwards added
"... everybody hates being sick themselves, that it's just
... a kind of strange sort of relief, I suppose ..."(H7,18)
This respondent's partner seemed to be clearer about the 'release'
function:
- 382 -
"... you want to laugh all of a sudden, because it had ...
probably shocked you a bit and you ... laugh anyway as a
release ..."(H5,12)
Another respondent summed up quite succinctly the 'repressed'
and 'non-repressed' modes of enjoyment of Monty Python humour.
"... I always had a feeling that Monty Python was somehow
split into two camps, those people who were somehow very
repressed, ... kind of enjoyed seeing what was repressed
acted out, and those people who, at the other end of the
scale, somehow lived and talked about Monty Python anyway,
also enjoyed it, who weren't necessarily repressed
..."(L10,30)
In fact this kind of polarization sits awkwardly with the kind of
semi-quantitative amusement-repression relation suggested by some of
the experimental literature and summarized above; (cf. pp.188-190 &
198-199 including Figs. 2 and 3) the quantitative relation post-
ulated there between amusement at tendentious comedic elements and
strength of repression is an inverted U-shaped curve, with maximum
average amusement occurring at moderate levels of repression. Would
it be psycho-economically viable for those at the extremes of
repression and non-repression to release (repressed) psychic energy
through laughter in such an instance? For the very repressed
individual the high degree of potential would not be worth the risk
of the eruption of very deep-seated excremental or other anxieties;
for the unrepressed person there would be little appreciation at
stake anyway. It may, on the other hand, be that both ends of L10's
polarization lie well towards the middle of the appreciation-
repression curve, in which case both groups of Monty Python 'fans'
would indeed record high levels of appreciation. After all, it is
arguable that the scale of repression employed in the kind of common
parlance reported here would exclude the extremes at both ends.
Nevertheless, repression was thus put on the agenda. Another
respondent was, as we have seen, extremely careful to distance his
own reaction from that of the 'typical' Monty Python fan:
"... I don't think for a majority of the real audience, par-
ticularly if they're not a Monty Python fan, 'cos a Monty
Python, even if they're repulsed by Imagery like that, in
other films, will probably appreciate it, because they know
what to expect from Monty Python material, but ... for a
majority of the audience, and for someone who doesn't appre-
ciate Monty Python to such an extent, ... they would actu-
ally have shut themselves off from that scene ..."L21,38)
"... I wouldn't class myself as a Monty Python fan, but what
I would class as a typical Monty Python fan, I would see as
being different to myself ... the typical Monty Python fan
... he would enjoy sort of alternative humour, ... which is
a sort of label term ... possibly rebellious against society
... possibly someone who ... has restricted themselves,
restricted their emotion, and can find outlets through the
kind of humour that Monty Python depicts ..."(L21,39)
With one particular group I became involved in a discussion of
Freudian theory. As one of the group agreed,
"... there is a kind of ... psychological cathartic release,
... as you say not being able to say directly what you'd
like to say, and therefore it's kind of disguised, and ...
displaces ..."(L12,110)
There was very little debate about the effectiveness of repeti-
tion of explicitly tendentious material. In the group which did
take up the question, one respondent began be denying the effecti-
vity of repeated shock:
"... if they depend on the shockingness of the certain sub-
ject matter, sure, once it's been expressed, once someone's
dared to say it; that's taken away all the value; if that's
all they're depending on; ..."(L14,95-96)
"... it's bound to diminish each time it's used ... if that
is the pure reason ..."(L14,96)
When I later pointed to the persistence of unconscious anxieties,
however, the same respondent joined with another in agreeing that
"Oh I think that's true ..."(L14)
- 384 -
"... and so, maybe we need to, there's a sort of safety-valve
which ..."(Q)
"Yes, ... in terms of fart-type jokes, or that sort of thing,
people still laugh at them ..."(L12)
"... the whoopee-cushion was the ultimate fart joke, wasn't
it ..."(L14)
"... the whoopee-cushion is the ultimate thing for kids, ...
and for adults alike, you know people still find it funny;
whether it's an area that people still feel embarrassed
about and therefore they need that release periodically ..."
(laughter) (L12) (104)
This happy turn of phrase was greeted with suitably appreciative
laughter from all present.
6.6 The Humour Appreciation Test 
At this stage we shall deal with comments made by some respon-
dents about the measurement of 'funniness'. The answers to one
particular questionnaire item concerned with reasons for liking
Monty Python will then be used to supplement the HAT findings in
relation to the 'repression-thesis' developed at various points
above, particularly in sections 2 and 4.
Two respondents raised the general problem of measurement of the
comedic.
"... how do you measure, I mean maybe that was funny, we
laughed a lot, but to measure the humour of laughter,
..."(L5,92)
"... I don't know how you measure humour ... that's a very
hard thing, to actually ring a number on that anyway, ...
it's ... hard to recognize in yourself what you particularly
find funny; we don't tend to stop and analyze humour
..."(L12,92)
The question of "is this funny?" was also considered by another
respondent:
- 385 -
"... I kept asking myself, is this funny? ... interesting to
see the difference between 'is this funny?' and 'is this
amusing' or entertaining ..."(L10,32)
While this distinction has been looked at above (cf. pg.311), and
notions of pleasure, funniness and entertainment certainly need to
be separated out, the difference between 'funniness' and 'amusement'
had to remain more obscure (cf. pp.173-174 above).
More pertinently to the HAT format actually used, a number of
respondents identified various ways in which it was difficult to
award scores for individual sections which were not influenced in
some way by response to some other part of the film. Thus one
person felt that
"... your mood can be altered by what you've seen before,
because you might be a bit more receptive ... if you really
enjoyed the beginning, it might sort of draw you in more
..."(L6,80)
Two others described how their assessments were consciously based on
a comparison with previous sections of the film:
"... I kept thinking, am I enjoying this one more or less
than the other one that I think I'll probably give the same
mark to ..."(L17,32)
"... you can actually say as you go through the film, I found
that bit funnier than the bit I saw before, but I put '2'
for that and I don't think it's unfunny so I've got to put
'2' again ..."(L6)
The reported generosity in another case must have been subject to a
similar 'contagion':
"... the only one I found extremely funny was the man explod-
ing, ... that was great ... and some, I've been quite gener-
ous ... like the first one I didn't find all that funny, but
I've put down a '3' ..."(H13,47)
though the enhanced mark for the first section would also have been
due to a particular susceptibility on the part of this specific
respondent. One is reminded here of two of the factors identified
by Freud as influencing responsiveness to the comedic:
"a generally cheerful mood, including toxic states ...
(etc.)"
"expectation of the comedic, increased susceptibility to rel-
atively low levels of stimulation ... (etc.)"39
Only one respondent pinpointed a problem which, if the lack of
comment is to be believed, was not as troublesome as I had antici-
pated. Though the carving of Meaning of Life into sections for HAT
purposes had been done with a view to concentrating on one particu-
lar type of comedicity in each section, it was nevertheless evident
that at least in the latter sections there was a comedic heteroge-
neity which may have made it difficult to award a simple 'funniness'
score. Thus
"... there'd be a particularly absurd moment that'd have me
rolling about ... then ... there'd be a stretch that was
relatively, I thought was really boring, I found it hard to
decide how I should express my reactions, as a total
..."(L13,67)
As we have noted already in passing, the questionnaire material
did not prove to be as useful as had been hoped. No sustained use
has as yet been made of the biographical data furnished in Fig.7
above and in Appendix 1.
One questionnaire item however, proved very interesting. Ques-
tion no.36 asked respondents who had previously indicated a liking
for Monty Python material to further indicate which given elements
of Monty Python humour contributed most to their appreciation. The
six elements proposed were irreverence, sexual/ excremental content,
animation, visual violence/aggression, absurdity/nonsense, and
- 387 -
performance/acting. A space for other reasons was provided, but in
fact very few alternatives were suggested.
Respondents were asked to number the elements 'in order of
Importance'. Of the 31 respondents who returned questionnaires,
five had omitted to answer the question, in most cases because they
expressed neither like nor dislike for Monty Python. A further 10
had simply ticked one or more of the suggested elements; since the
number of items ticked varies between one and four, effective
comparison would appear very difficult, though a simple count of how
many times each element had been ticked gives striking results (cf.
Fig.8)
Most interestingly, the listings in order of Importance by the
remaining 16 questionnaire respondents lent themselves to a very
simple exercise. A total of the priority-scores given for each of
the comedic factors/elements would give a more or less clear indica-
tion of those factors seen (by our respondents) as most (and least)
important in their appreciation of Monty Python. This exercise is
carried out in Fig.9.
Absurdity/nonsense and irreverence clearly emerge as the factors
agreed to be most Important, with a striking unanimity apparent
particularly among the (provincial) Hemel Hempstead (H) responses.
Performance comes out somewhere in the middle, and the animation
seems to have scored rather badly. It is perhaps noteworthy,
however, - the significance of this will be discussed below - that
the sexual/excremental and violent aspects of Monty Python humour
were not deemed important factors in the enjoyment of the material
- 388 -
irreverence 	 6
sexual/excremental 	 0
animation 	 5
visual violence/aggression . . 	 1
absurdity/nonsense 	 9
performance/actinq 	 6
Fig.8 Total number of ticks awarded for each Monty Python
amusement-factor listed in questionnaire item no.36 by
those respondents who did not place the factors in rank
order.
irreverence sexual/
excremental
animation 'violence' absurd/
nonsense
performance
H1	 11 4 6 5 11 3
H5	 2 6 3 5 1 4
H7	 2 6 4 5 1 3
H8	 3 5 4 6 1 2
H9	 2 5 6 3 1 4
Hll	 2 6 4 5 1 3
H12	 2 3 5 6 1 4
H13	 2 5 4 3 1 6
L2	 1 51 4 5i 2 3
L3	 2 5 5 3 1 5
L6	 1 2 6 3 4 5
L9	 2 6 4 5 1 3
L12	 2 5 4 6 1 3
L13	 1 6 5 3 2 4
L16	 2 5 6 4 1 3
L22	 3 6 4 5 1 2
TOTAL	 30i 801 74 721 21i 57	 I
Fig.9 Modified preference scores 4  for those respondents who 
placed some or all listed factors in order of preference, 
from most important factor in appreciation of Monty
Python (=1) to least important (=6). (Questionnaire item
no.36
by a large majority of these respondents. (This no doubt also helps
to explain the low 'animation' score. Gilliam's Monty Python
animations have frequently been of a marked grotesque and 'violent'
nature. (cf. also pp.150-151 above)). The 'rank order' is moreover
almost exactly reproduced in the tabulation (Fig.8) of ticks awarded
in a non-ranking exercise by some other respondents. The absurd/
- 389 -
nonsensical was again clearly the major factor, with the violent and
sexual/excremental gaining only one tick between the two categories.
The question is: are sexual/excremental/tendentious comedic
elements really insignificant in deciding what material is appreci-
ated, or is there a pressure for the importance of such factors to
remain secret and unacknowledged? After all, if anxieties relating
to tendentious material are repressed, how likely is a questionnaire
item to breach the defences of that repression?
Humour Ratings Sheets / Humour Appreciation Tests (HATs) were
completed by 18 respondents, 16 of whom took part in the interview
sessions. The results of the HATs are summarised in Fig.10.
HAT 1 HAT 2 HAT 3 HAT 4 HAT 5 HAT 6 Q36 interview average of
6 scores
H1 5 64 4 4 5 4 1 J 4.75
H2 1 4 3 3 3 3 2.8
_H5 5 7 5 6 7 7 J J 6.2
H7 4 5 5 6 7 6 J J 5.5
Hll 4 5 6 4 7 4 J J 5.0
H12 3 5 4 4 7 4 1 4.5
_H13 5 7 7 6 6 6 J 6.2
_L5 2 5 4 54 7 5 1 4.75
_L6 3 5 2 2 5 2 1 J 3.2
_L10 4 7 6 4 5 3 J 4.8
L12 2 6 5 5 6 51 4.8
L13 5 5 3 4 4 5 1 J 4.3
L14 6 7 5 6 5 5 J 5.7
L16 7 6 6 6 7 5 1 J 6.2
L17 1 6 5 3 2 2 1 3.2
L21 6 3 5 4 6 - J 4.8
L22 6 5 3 4 5 5 / J 4.7
_L23 3 5 3 1 1 2 J 2.5
TOTAL	 72 97.E 81 77.5 95 73
AVERAGE14.0 5.4 4.5 4.3 5.3 4.3 4.6
Fig.10 Summary of Humour Ratings Sheet responses
- 390 -
Section 1, the Crimson Permanent Assurance film, obtained the
lowest average humour appreciation rating. The humour in this
section was clearly of a whimsical, gentle kind, with 'violence' of
a very 'reasonable' nature. Many respondents commented in discus-
sion about their enjoyment of this section, and about how this
enjoyment was not the same as finding the episode 'funny'.
Section 2 was deliberately selected as that part of the film
containing most 'sexual' humour. This section not only elicited the
highest average humour appreciation rating, but was also very
visibly/audibly enjoyed by most respondents, particularly in compar-
ison with the first HAT section.
Sections 3 and 4 contained the most 'violent' material in the
film; both sections received moderate humour appreciation scores.
The second of these sections also included the absurd/dadaist Middle
of the Film, which some respondents reported enjoying, while others
were quite bemused. The particular combination of the absurdity of
the Middle of the Film and the grotesque visceral violence of the
Live Organ Transplants sequence no doubt gave rise to some difficul-
ties in completing the ratings sheets. The two parts of this
section would, in retrospect, probably have been better treated as
two separate sections, especially in view of the high appreciation
of absurdity/nonsense as a vital ingredient of Monty Python reported
by many of the respondents (cf. Fig.9 above).
Section 5, The Autumn Years, was dominated by the exploding Mr.
Creosote, and was accorded a high average humour appreciation rating
only just below that for section 2. While this section was deliber-
- 391 -
ately selected within the HAT structure as an instance of excremen-
tal/grotesque humour, it is interesting that a number of the respon-
dents identified as their primary sources of pleasure other elements
such as performance, exaggeration, exposure of hypocrisy/ gluttony
etc. Again the question of whether the respondents could really be
expected to admit to the excremental as a fertile sense of humour is
a vexed one.
Finally Section 6 and 'Death' was scored only moderately, a
number of respondents feeling that the end of the film lacked
originality and/or structure. This was underlined by the relative
lack of laughter which generally accompanied the final part of the
film, particularly in contrast to the excesses of Section 5.
Ten respondents who took part in the interview sessions had also
provided rank-order responses to item 36 in the questionnaire. We
are now in a position to indulge in a little speculation about how
these two sets of data (Figs.9 and 10) fit together, and to some
extent also about the HAT profiles provided by the 8 respondents who
had not given rank-order replies to item 36.
The most striking and indeed exciting correlation between the
two sets of data is that sexual/excremental humour was judged to be
the least important factor determining appreciation of Monty Python,
while HAT sections 2 and 5 - parts of the film containing the Sperm
Song, the sex-education lesson, the Penis Song and the exploding Mr.
Creosote - were seen as considerably funnier than the other sec-
tions.
How well does a classical-repression thesis account for this
apparently complete inversion of reported preferences? It may be
useful to construct a heuristic typology to describe how the indi-
vidual respondents seemed to fit with a classical-repression model.
It will be necessary to override for the time being the claims of
some of the respondents that their enjoyment of Mr. Creosote, for
example, was due more to factors such as performance and satire than
to excremental/bodily anxieties. While accepting that such links
would augment or modify enjoyment, we may, polemically, remind
ourselves of two propositions which we have already encountered:
"The funniness provided by tendentious content is inversely
related to the audience's awareness of its presence and
nature. 4i
"Freudians may argue, from a theoretical rather than an
empirical base, that everyone represses their instinctual
nature to some degree. 42
(i) Classical repression
Nine of the eighteen respondents who completed HAT ratings
sheets may be argued to inhabit this category, with appreciation
scores for HAT sections 2 and 5 high, but with sexual/excremental
(and probably 'violent') given low priority in questionnaire item
36. A tenth respondent is included by default.
Good examples here are H1, H5, Hll and L12. The latter of these
respondents also commented in the questionnaire about her preference
for subtlety, and included 'witty' under 'other' factors in item 36,
yet sections 2 and 5 were her highest HAT scores.
Another fairly clear instance is provided by L5. This respon-
dent did not put the factors in Q36 in rank order, but did tick two
factors other than 'sexual/excremental' and 'violent'. He scored
'7' for the more excremental section 5, and '5' for section 2.
Two other respondents may belong in this box, though their HAT
scores are rather less conclusive. In the case of L22, HAT scores
for sections 2 and 5 were above the average appreciation score given
by that respondent to the film, but not very noticeably so. L13's
HAT scores were too uniform to be particularly significant, though
Section 2 did get the equal highest HAT score.
The case of two other subjects is more difficult. H13 placed
'visual violence/aggression' at no.3 in item 36, and 'sexual/
excremental at no.5. This respondent confirmed during the discus-
sion that he appreciated aggressive/cruel humour. He also laughed a
great deal during the interview session, most particularly signifi-
cantly during our discussion of sexual humour. His HAT scores were
uniformly high, with section 2 equal top. L16, though less of a
laugher, presents a similar profile, though without the express
liking for cruel/aggressive humour. Again the HAT scores were high,
with section 5 equal top. With this respondent also the discussion
provides significant clues; most noticeably a refrain of
"... I know I should be shocked ... I can't explain why ...
I'm not ..." (cf. pg.380 above)
Finally, one subject, L10 1 cannot really be placed, since though
HAT sections 2 and 5 scored '7' and '5' respectively, there is
little else to go on. The respondent expressed a dislike for gross
- 394 -
exaggeration in discussion, but there is no entry for questionnaire
item 36.
(ii) Relative lack of repression? 
Three respondents will be included in this subsection. This is,
again, an indication of a particular kind of correlation in their
Q36/HAT results, not, of course, a psychoanalytic diagnosis
Two of these respondents, H12 and L6, scored 'sexual/ excremen-
tal' high on their list of factors important in Monty Python com-
edicity. In the case of the first of these, the respondent was
French, so a relative unfamiliarity with the Monty Python team may
have pushed down the 'performance' rating. Still, the partial
avowal of pleasure in sexual/excremental humour was well reflected
in high HAT scores for sections 2 and 5. The second of these two
respondents scored irreverence as most important in Q36, with
'sexual/excremental' second, and 'visual violence/aggression' third.
This respondent duly gave low HAT scores (2 or 3) to all sections of
the film except sections 2 and 5.
The scores for a third respondent also seemed to correlate in a
non-repressed way. H2 identified herself as "definitely not a Monty
Python fan" and cited absurdity/nonsense and the violent as the
factors she most disliked. This would indicate that she would have
placed the sexual/excremental not lower than 4th in a rank order, a
higher position than the average 5th. This respondent's HAT scores
were predictably low, with the exception of that for section 2.
(iii) Discrepant sexual and excremental Humour appreciation
rating
While in the instances already considered there must of course
have been a distinction to be made between the sexual and the
excremental, it appeared, given the nature of the research data,43
that more could perhaps be inferred about an overall situation of
repressedness. In the remaining 5 cases it seemed that there was
significant evidence for a distinction between the sexual and the
excremental to be made.
Three of these respondents indicated a marked preference for HAT
section 2 as compared with section 5. L14, who had ticked all
entries in Q36 except 'sexual/excremental' and 'visual violence/
aggression', scored a '7' for the more 'sexual' HAT section 2, and
her equal lowest score, '5', for section 5. Even more striking were
the HAT ratings for L17 and L23, neither of whom had answered Q36.
L17 recorded a '6' for HAT section 2 and '2' (only slightly funny)
for section 5, while for L23 the scores were '5' and '1' respec-
tively - the latter respondent also gave a '1' to the section
containing the Live Organ Transplants sequence. Both these respon-
dents also expressed during discussion a dislike for the excessive
vomiting, gore etc. of some sequences. It would clearly be pos-
sible, within the parameters of a Freudian repression model, to
speculate about why, for these respondents, the excremental may have
given rise to anxieties which the 'joke-work' was unable to over-
come.
The reverse appeared to be the case for the remaining two
respondents. One of these, H7, would perhaps also fit the 'classi-
cal repressions' description, but indicated during discussion that
he had found overtly sexual material (such as that in Derek and
Clive) unfunny; this is to some extent reflected in his HAT ratings.
While scoring fairly generously throughout, he scored '7' for HAT
section 5, and his second lowest mark was a '5' for section 2.
Finally, the youngest respondent, L21, was very markedly alone in
giving his lowest appreciation score, '3', to HAT section 2, while
his equal highest mark went to section 5. This was the respondent
whose activities include collecting medals, records and horror-film
material, and who showed a marked categorising/rationalist tendency
in a number of his comments.
If it is difficult to go very far with the individual question-
naire and HAT profiles, one thing at least is clear. While it is
possible to argue that the relation between the HAT ratings totals
for sections 2 and 5 and the non-preference for sexual/excremental
humour expressed in Q36 supports a broadly Freudian repression-
thesis, this is certainly not to Bay that each individual respondent
conforms unproblematically to the repression-model. Though we have
tried to indicate how some of the respondents at least fit into such
a model, others clearly do not. Our findings/remarks on this must
perforce remain tentative.
6.7 The Mood-Adiective Check-Lists (MACLs) 
The pre- and post-film MACL responses were collated on a summary
sheet to show the shifts which each respondent had recorded for each
- 397 -
of the 100 words. (Fig.11). The total and average unit changes for
each word could then be computed. Fig.12 shows the distribution of
the words according to the total net shift each word had been
subjected to, together with the number of respondents who had
recorded a change in their response to each word.
Thirty-two words were then selected for closer analysis; nine-
teen of these were those corresponding to Nowlis and Green's origi-
nal 'anxiety' cluster. 44 Total and average shifts for these
adjectives are summarised in Fig.13.
A number of significant observations can be made about the MACL
findings. The first thing to note is a marked downward trend in the
responses recorded before and after Meaning of Life; this is
graphically reflected in the shape of Fig.12. For the great major-
ity of the words chosen for the lists, lower scores were recorded
after the film than before. Thus 47 words suffered an overall
downward shift of two or more units, whereas 16 scored two or more
units higher after the film than before.
Secondly, there was also a noticeable downward shift in many of
the 19 Nowlis and Green 'anxiety' words (indicated by the prefix *NG
in Fig.11). The words 'frustrated', 'tense', 'nervous', 'on edge',
'worried', 'afraid' and 'insecure' were all marked down by an
overall four units or more, whereas only 'startled' was marked up to
a comparable degree. Indeed only two of the 19 Nowlis and Green
words - 'fearful' and 'startled' - obtained an overall increased
score.
...	 r. 	m	 cc
i	 L-1
oo	 a	 ot ID	 01	 cl. m n 0, 1D	 01	 113 V 01 0
CO	 CO	 crt t-i	 m	 4 n m co a	 at	 co a in 0 N
iat	 Cs 	 N
IrILD0r/HH0 NNL-1 .4.	 U1N .LP L-I ONVNILDHOHHHHVONHNLIPVN
3UINVIDVM0
NPNIDLONIDLON tow
ot	 mmocin comaincooNNr-0
--	 SI. 	CO	 0 Ul	 N	 L-I 0	 cq 	 r1 H N N sl. 	ID	 v-1 0 N 01 in	 co	 t-I o	 EN	 t-t N H ID 0 N H m	 ID 1, 	N
H	 4 ,4
i	 1	 1	 1
H N N0
1	 1	 1
L-I	 1	 1
H	 .4	 s-4
1	 1	 +
m	 i	 in
n	 n	 .-1
1	 I	 1
.-i	 ID	 NP)
1	 +	 1
1	 cl.
N	 N	 L-I
1	 I	 +
U1	 1.0	 01
1	 I	 1
H V	 IN
++	 +
1	 -4
-> -01 -4 -3 -4 -3 -4
1	 -5
-4, .--4 -- -* "dt: -VP
-.4 <--<- --) -) 4- 4-
-.,	 ..).	 .;.
,	 el-1
-3 4- 4- -) 4- 4- -,	 4-
4-	 -1.
:6- 4- -3 --a. 4- -) 4-
-D 4 -0	 t -S	 -3 -4 -4 .34 4- 4-
4- 4- -4 --3)	 1
-4 -34- 4- -4 4- 4- 4-
--.. -% -3
-1)--) -> -S-->	 -)
4- 4-
E- 4- 4-
-.,,, 4-
ea- t r-
- 4 -, -;
F-----"
-11 .-.). -> -;
...t-
.4- 4 3 -4
,- -,
4- -4
.4- 4- -3 t
-4-41 4-4- --/I - I -* 4- -,
:it -.c-4- -3 -34--4 -3" Z 44; r- 4-4- 4- -3	 i--4 L'"-1-5 .9_:. 4- r-)--) -) -) 72; 7- .4 -1 7-1--3	 -a r 4- 4 -) i -0,
-3-3 -it -3 4- -3-3 -3 -3 4- 4-
4-4- 4-4- -5--N-, -> 4- -) -4.
-4 -S. -3 -3 -4 -S
-. 4 4 4 -> 4- -5 II -1 -i =',.	 .4- -4,.-A. -1
4- 4- - 4 -1 -4-34-4-4- .e- --> -* --I
g	 471	 140051Ii4
4	 0	 4
t	 ti	 ti.
CD	 ID	 0
H 0 0
4	 4	 4
P.	 4-1H	 0COWCD
0	 >	 14al	 .-1	 0.0	 4-1 	 Cr
f).1	 CI	 VI
04	 4 -1	 H
04	 41	 ID4	 4	 .0
.FD$	 0	 'V)
14H	 1-10	 4	 cr1CI	 0	 C.1
.4	 .0H	 0	 4-10	 44	 I
Ili	 it	 to'
f-I	 00
al A HC./	 U	 000
001'v-in
>44	 44
4.14	 4-1 	 414	 0	 .-1
4-1 	 ID	 04 V g
8	 ;14	 Z
0005)
0	 0	 0 C1
V	 CD	 0
0	 4, 	 CO4 4	 10
mu	 -10)	 tla)
H	 au.
ID	 al	 0
V V V
4-1	 0
0.4CD	 CD	 44
4-1 	 14	 0/4	 CD	 41
14	 4-1 	 +1
aaj	 1.51	 cl
uu	 uu	 uu
0 H +IV .0 v
0-1	 0	 >
a#3 4	 i
0	 i	 1:1V V V
4-1	 0
H	 ITI	 -2
1	 014	 r4V	 411	 CD
0,-10100110
4.10	 40
41	 .4	 H
D1 S A 11
3PO	 s511	 DC4	 0	 0	 4.4
Fig.11 MACL Summary Sheet
- 399 -
Fig. 11 (continued)
F..	 N
0	 1-1
ID	 in	 rn cq 0 V
rn	 rn	 N
iv	 W	 ID 4 01 PI
4 WI	 N ID 141 in r4	 41 	 0
0	 ID	 01 N 0 ID
I/1	 PI 141	 PI	 01 0	 14	 rn fl	 III	 N PI	 N.	4 PI 4 ID N 41 	 N WI en an r- 0 0 1.	 00	 44 v4	 10	 WI
1.	 H 141	 0 v4	 41 	 PI N h P1 0	 P..	 0 ri	 ri	 N H an In N 44 0 PI N 0 d .0 0 C4	 4	 0. 14	 In	 pl
1	 01 CO	 1-1 0	 .-I	 rn
0	 .4. 	 ..0 sr 	 03	 al NOW
'ON 1311 44 ICI	 'OW PI ID 0300 N rn N 14	 ID	 In
-	 ri (0 0 c-1	 4	 pl s,	 v-I	 el
0	 v-I	 0
CV M 4 H N. 112 0) ri 0 .4 CV 0 40	 10	 0 0/	 0/..	 pi	 pi	 Pi	 pi
.4	 44
.	 rii
I	 v-II 01	 PI	
I 	 +	 I
ON	 1-1
+	 +	 I 41. 	 44	 01I	 +	 I
II-	 4
Id.	 0
1 	 I
M	 ID 1
It)	 '0	 0)	 4I	 111 
I	 +	 +	 +	 I
-0. r <- , 4
4- 4- -) --0 4- -0 4-4-
4- Z4- -4 -4
4- -01
-1,	 -111. 4.-
-lb, -4
4- -/ -44- -, .444, 4-4- 4-	 -.0 -0
-/ -) -44- 4-4- -4 -.1, 3 --., -) -rs -1
<- 3 -1 -1 ..(- 4- -31
4- -1-1 -I. 4-
4- 4-
4- 4-
4-4-'4- A-
4- 4-
Jr- t -1
4- 4- -0
-S	 4.-
-0 -0	 44-
-0 t -4 -I --4) -, -I-0
4- -4 3
-, 4-	 k-	 t -3
--) -4
-1, -4
-) -J 4- t	 -4. -0
4- PD
4- -* 4- 4-
4-	 4-
-4.4-4-	 4-4-
-0 t -.)
4- -*	
4-	 . -0 -4 -3 -11, -0 -34-	 -I,
-) 4-
-4 -/ -N 3 -11
*- 3 4-
-5 -0 1' t
-5 -P
4- .4 4- 4
. 4 - -0 4- -0
-5	 -0	 -I. -4
('`i;
tn	 al
vi	 a)
,,	 .t
...	 tr,.
'8	 il
444	 34
4.3	 co
as	 34	 co
it'	 	 LI
4	 1	 .-01
44	 *I	 .0
0	 ,_,	 41 030410
ti Ti	 T's0	 13
2	 PI	 0
.0	 PI	 vs-1
> 014000
0V4-34-/
14	 4D	 0/
0	 ;-1	 20	 la .	 a)
101	 n	 tmg 	.4	 .6-1
>'CI	 PI
ID	 4-1DV
41	 0	 0/
0	 P.4-3
T41 	 01	 iSi
0	 1.1	 PI
4,1	 t	 ti,-A	 -14	 -4-1
P00.-I
e/	 ;I
PI	 ID
40) 	 1
4.3m	 0
lig	 2
01.1	 5,
1	 r,'g	 4-:,	 .
PI	 14	 PI
a o P.
+30011400.4
0	 to
..-1	 o
0	 r-1	 .0 	 .1
4..ig	v.	 s	 74
0	 Pi	 0	 0	 0	 0
.-. r-i	 440 0   4
a.	 a,	 a.	 0.	 0' .14
- 400 -
Fig. 11 (continued)
.	 01	 ID	 .0
I's	 03	 111 CO	 in	 V 1.0	 0	 N es 	 el	 V III	 V	 ID N h 4 ID h H ID	 CO	 CO 03	 14	 Is 0 H d
;	 PI	 ID	 rel
d	 in	 W, ill	 M	 el di 	0	 .-I el N M 0 	 e-I	 el .-I	 .0 	 C4 C4	 01	 .4 .4	 sp	 up co	 03	 m M	 ..).	 4,
I.	 to	 o	 4 M	 m	 .-I el	 ei	 .-I ni	 0	 .-I 4, 	.-1	 .-t e-I	 M	 el .-I	 el	 N d	 .1	 0 d di N 0 14 W N N 0
U) 2 in so	 h	 in ID	 4. 	 ID ID 0 H 4.	 N	 in ci. 	 .-I	 ICI H	 ICI	 el el	 CI	 .-1 CO	 in	 at 2	 .3, 	in m	 r--	 r-
- co o m es	 to	 .-o ..3	 m	 .4 m	 0	 .-i r-	 ei	 ei m	 la	 .0 .-I	 '0	 N In H 0 CO	 0	 C1I 0 Ol 0 Cl 0 0
r	 .0	 O N
j+HIIIIIIII
el N d N	 ei	 in el	 I	 I el	 H	 4.
+III+
r.I	 ICI	 r-I
I	 H	 r-I
I	 i+II
N	 CO	 .-I I	 INi ON .4.-i	 I	 +
tO	 .4	 h
+	 +	 I
1	 -,i.
---). -. 4-- -Jr -It	 -3 4- -A
4- --2 -) 1 -4 4- 3 -A ->
	 - 	 --3.
-3. 4-
4- -6.
14- 4- ---3, 4* 4- 1
.c- --- -.- -3 -3	 4- -3 .-4 -4 4r 4-
{- -) -.; -, 4- 4- 4-4- -D.
4. -9
4- 4- 4-
44-	 -.1
.4- -.> -D 1C--44- --) 4-	 _...,
4--4	 4- -4 'IC- -0 -0
-9 -A
4-	 -A
.4- 4- --*
4-	 .4
-').	 -4 t -4 4-
- 1' -1
`4- 4--
-) t 4- t 4- -7: -I-.6 -4 -A
ea- -3 -, 3 4,- --5 -4 -)
at -) t A-
A-	 -;
4- 4- --> 1 4-
-)-) --)
4- r __, .4-
4-1- ' -1 4-3 -)
--A-0 --A 4- -)
t	 -A
-). -4 4-
4-	 -}
4-	 -)
-* 4-	 4- -) -.)
-A * -> 4- 4-
-> -2
..4.
'0.-I
.a	 44to	 +I
GI	 0
All	 till	 V
0	 ID	 0
0 V H
.4 0 40
.1-1 	+1	 00151+10	 to	 +3
ril	 71	 acli	 0	 0
0'0 00-el440
4.30000000000
A4	 1	 10
o	 '..4	 "A
tO	 0	 W4444000000000000000004043+ )
>I	 ..
Di	 is	 B
tD	 .0	 .0
0H.00
6	 31 ilri	 El	 0
>I	 +I 	0
Vi	 '4	 20	 4.)	 4-;
10	 .0 	 +90	 0	 0.0	 0	 +1
1 2 NA)	 0	 0
410 v0
4	 +1+I 	11-I4	 0 +I
..11 	 N	 ti
a	 0	 0
H44	 41 4+I	 ON
to	 1:1	 4-)
2	 N.0	 +I	 I.1
a+I ;)
14	 +3	 At
ii	 N	 0.0	 FL	 rl
4.)	 0.0 0 0
9C04) 0
$.1	 ae
g	 ;	 .0
1	 I	 ,-;
E	 4	 1,-1.04 .401 2 1
- 403. -
N	 tO	 r) 1
0	 O
, 4 4.4W
O 014 	 4,
co 2-1 CO OH
 0 OH
'H 4-1 4-1 WI-)
I-- CO .1 m r- CO 01 0 CD rl CO 41. 0 N 0 H	 4,1 CI	 ul 0 c.4 ul 0 N	 H CO CD r- H
.4	 al
U)	 Y
> a)	 o	 y
-rf	 4-)	 .)-1	 Ts	 a)
4-)	 ID	 4->	 6	 a)	 44
03	 0)	 00	 CV a)	 4-1	 4,
CU I-1 r--1 '0 14	 Ha)	 00	 0	 4-40r ,
CU 0 0, CD al	 4-2-2-1	 -2-1000.40 0.	a)	 'd
14 )44 E .0 4, 0.0) 141 0. O 4-2 -ri -,1	 0 0) M	 0	 W
	44 44 CU 0 0 1211 -.1 0 0 ,-.1 A al X	 44 4-1 0 'CI 1
a) Ill 4-1 OH 3 4-'.0	 rn 02 102 0 .15 4, RI 4-1 04-1 ,s4 c)
14 (1) 0 4, al 0 0 4, 4:1 34 H	 4, 0 CO CD 0 0 ,-1 0 0
0.000 0 -.-1 "4 o g 0)0 140 OH 0 .0 014 CD A A
030  u 91:1 .0 1:1 cu (1) 4a 14-i 44 HI ,-I X r-I 0 0.0.0 CO DI
4-)	 0
t50	 0)
4,	71
O 14H a)
(.1 OH	 2-1
 2-1 04 0 0
O 0 A .0
..41. N CO M r.1 m el .4. H H .1 r- CO CD ID rl	 LO 1
.4 .4	 col
CD	 0
TI CD 4-4 ,	 0.H	 0%
	0 4- 2 44 V) - . r-I 4,	H a,
101 H ul ta 0 tti >4. (D rn	 4, 44	 ri)
0	 H+4
10 U144 w ta ).4	 -2-1 	 u24460
O.1 4 a) 01 .0 HI CD 0	 r0 tO N 0 4.4
14	 4 40	 HI 4-4 '0 14 44 I) 44 01
0 0) N 0, g a, I-) DI HI	 C.) 4-1 OHO0
g g co a) 4/	 0) HI CD fa. 0 03 011 CD 0 O.
O 0  0 .0 .0 .0.01-)H 0 al ar1t0 0 a) 0 
	ri EN CT) un ..12 rs rn tO an cs1 Cn )0 in .1. .4.	 N 1
H	 CO 1
0)	 ca
..,4 a	 -,
0--,	 co	 W ili	 0
	(1) 4-1 4-4	 .15 0 0 O 0 r-I U3
> ..	 1:0	 0 W 0 HI .41 0 40 0 CU
O Ci1 -	 '471 41 -41	 1-(1) ';' -2 2 ;I - 2, 8''i,
, -,-,0,,0	 04,04-40 H 4, 1 0
HO 0) 111 IV Hi (D -2-1 -2-1 114 (r) W 0. 44 -2-1
4-2 14 4, 0) DI 2-1 ti) 14 4, a,44	 WHOO
O 4-1c-, H,1	 0 44 0) -.1 4)	 000
RI  RI 0 0 '101 .0 -r1 -ill a Ei W.	 M CO DI
.4. al r- 0) CD v.) rn CD ...1.	 01
tr,	 a)
-.-I	 ..-1
4,	4-1
DI N	 0
14 0 H	 w	 H
4-)a)4J04Eam0tl.
 y 4-1 0 (r) 0 t( 44 al
U) -,-) 4, cll 0 0 .0 4, 41
O 44 A 0 14 > ID u) 1-1
O 0 0 14 4-2 14	 014
O 0 0 0 0 111 0 14 0
O 00 a)-HOC) 4-2 3
tO 40 40 r- LC.
CO	 a)
P	 00	 CO 0
14 71 -2-1 4-1 O.1	 0 3
0) 0 CD	 4-1 4-)	00
0. 0 .01 0 H	 DI 0 14 1
04 14 0 A .0 044414W44	 00
O 44 1-1 0.0 1211 14 -.1 14 rn '0
1401-3 4-4 00 0.OH HH
 WOW CO 01 t.1, 4.1 4-1 O
U) 4-) w w
O 0 4.) 4, 0	 41
O 00044	 0
0	 H 14 0 4,	4-1
- W 0 4, 14 a) 0
1 44 Ha, W 4 W
0.4-4 0 4-3 04	 0
0:3	 4-4 44 0 (11	 V)
1  1_ CD 214 4.1 14 43 0
- 402 -
Nowlis and Green 'anxiety' cluster (*NG in Fig.11)
respondents
recording
change
change
shift per
respondent
(over all
respondents)
shift per
respondent
affected
afraid
desperate
-0.24*
-0.18
-2.00**
-3.00
downhearted 3 -3 -0.18 -1.00
fearful
frightened
+0.12
-0.06
+1.00
-1.00
frustrated 6 -9 -0.53 -1.50
helpless 3 -2 -0.12 -0.67
insecure 3 -4 -0.24 -1.33
jittery 4 -3 -0.18 -0.75
nervous 6 -7 -0.41 -1.17
on edge 5 -6 -0.35 -1.20
panicky 0.00 0.00
shaky 0.00 0.00
shocked 2 0.00 0.00
atartled 4 +5 +0.29 +1.25
tense
terrified
-0.47
-0.06
-1.14
-1.00
upset 3 -2 -0.12 -0.67
worried 4 -7 -0.41 -1.75
other selected words (* in Fig.11
respondents
recording
change
change
1' 4.
shift per
respondent
(over all
res.ondents
shift per
respondent
affected
active 13 -4 -0.24 -0.31
apprehensive 6 -10 -0.59 -1.67
belligerent 4 -1 -0.06 -0.25
delighted 8 +6 +0.35 +0.75
dissatisfied 4 -4 -0.24 -1.00
inactive 10 +7 +0.41 +0.70
overjoyed 4 +6 +0.35 +1.50
pleased 9 +9 +0.53 +1.00
quiet 10 +5 +0.29 +0.50
rebellious 6 -4 -0.24 -0.67
satisfied
secure
-0.12
-0.12
-0.25
-0.25
uncertain 8 -10 -0.59 -1.25
Fig.13 MACL shifts for 32 selected words.
* Shift per respondent covering all respondents was calculated by
averaging the net unit shift over all 17 respondents.
** Shift per respondent affected was calculated by averaging the net
unit shift for a particular word over the number of respondents
who had indicated a shift for that word.
Average respondents reporting change for N & G list = 14 = 3.00
Average respondents reporting change for 'other selected words'
- TU = 7 ' 10
Average respondents indicating change for all words_583 =
- 5 . 83T017 
This would seem clearly to support the tentative thesis outlined
above that the comedic in general (and the sexual/excremental/
absurdist humour of Meaning of Life in particular) serves to
alleviate anxiety by allowing the release of repressed psychic
energy. One odd finding, however, particularly in view of the
interview material discussed above, is that the word 'shocked'
underwent no net change and indeed was only marked up by one respon-
dent, down by one other.
In this context it may be significant that the average number of
respondents noting any change over all 100 words was 5.83, whereas
for the Nowlis and Green words the average number of respondents
recording change was 3.00 (cf. Fig.13). This may indicate that
'anxiety' was not affected by Meaning of Life as much as were other
mood-factors not selected as indicative of 'anxiety'. Certainly the
Nowlis and Green list leaves room for doubt; while the words in
their list seem sound enough, there would appear to be other candi-
dates. Thus 'apprehensive' and 'uncertain' both received net shifts
of -10; these shifts could surely also be argued to show reduced
anxiety.
Thirdly the other thirteen words included in our analysis
(prefixed in Fig.11) tend to corroborate the shifts observed in the
Nowlis and Green list. In addition to the downward shift for words
such as 'apprehensive', 'uncertain', 'dissatisfied', 'irritated' and
others, there is a marked indication of active enjoyment, with large
net unit increases for 'delighted', 'overjoyed' and 'pleased'. By
contrast, some other words which might be associated with a more
reflective enjoyment were marked down: thus 'satisfied' and
'secure'.
An odd finding, which confirms some very similar observations by
Nowlis and Green in their original research, 45 is that pairs of
'opposite' words were not necessarily affected in 'opposite' ways.
Thus 'secure' and 'insecure' both experienced a downward shift (-2
and -4 respectively), as did 'satisfied' (-2) and 'dissatisfied'
(-4). More ambivalent evidence for the repression-thesis
Finally, among the results for our other 13 words there is some
additional support for the cathartic effect of humour. The score
for 'rebellious' went down (-4), as did that for 'active' (-4),
while there were increased unit scores for 'quiet' (+5) and 'inac-
tive' (+7).
The analysis of the MACL which has been offered here can make
little pretence to statistical rigour. It should not be easy to
disagree, however, that at the end of Meaning of Life the respon-
dents were, on the whole, more inactive, more delighted, overjoyed
and pleased, and less nervous, less on edge, less worried, apprehen-
sive, tense, uncertain or frustrated.
There is, still, a problem about making generalisations of this
kind. As we felt obliged to ask ourselves in the case of the HAT
results above, how do individual respondents fit into the overall
pattern?" In the same way that hardly any respondent could be said
to fit the tidy repression-model suggested by the summarized HAT/Q36
results, it may be that no individual respondent profile bears any
- 405 -
resemblance to the results summarized in Figs.12 and 131 Are there
any conclusions to be drawn from an examination of the MACL profiles
of individual respondents?
H1, for example, recorded a number of mood adjective shifts
which appear to go directly against the overall trend which we have
described. While the response to 'startled' (+3) is striking, other
responses were uniformly against the current. Thus 'active' (+1),
'nervous' (+1), 'pleased' (-1), 'quiet' (-2) and 'tense' (+1).
The responses of H2 indicated increased tiredness, lowered
alertness and activeness. Though her score for 'frustrated' was +1,
this respondent generally remained in step with the trend. As was
the case for a number of respondents, however, there were relatively
few shifts recorded for the 32 'key' words on which we focused
above.
In the case of H5 there were relatively few shifts in response,
particularly for the 32 key-words.
This was also the case for H7, though there were clearly
recorded increases in playfulness and activity; in this sense this
person was not entirely typical in relation to the prevailing
tendency towards quiescence and tranquility.
The shifts recorded for H11 were similar to those for H7.
The responses for H12 indicated a winding-down and contentment,
with little of the active enjoyment shown by a number of other
- 406 -
respondents. Though her shift for 'jittery' was '+1', and thus
against the general trend, the '+3' of 'quiet' was more typical.
The adjective-shifts recorded by H13 were rather more spectacu-
lar, with many scores of +/- 2 or 3. This respondent encapsulated
some of the 'contradictory' trends mentioned above (pg.405), wherein
apparently opposed adjectives were moved in the same direction
Thus in this instance we had 'carefree' (+2) and 'contemplative'
(+3); 'tired' (+2), 'active' (+2) and 'alert' (+3). Nevertheless the
overall responses for this subject were fairly consistent in respect
to anxiety/catharsis; for example there was 'belligerent' (-2),
'frustrated' (-3), 'tense' (-2) and 'worried' (-2).47
L5 also furnished an abundance of MACL responses. The overall
impression was of quiescence/relaxation, indeed of a 'typical'
paradigm case of released repression. Though the shift for 'satis-
fied' was -2, most other responses followed the statistical trend:
'afraid' (-3), 'frustrated' (-3), 'insecure' (-1), 'jittery' (-2),
'nervous' (-2), 'on edge' (-2), 'quiet' (+2), 'rebellious' (-1),
'secure' (+1) and 'tense' (-3).
L6 also followed the trend towards quietitude and relaxation,
but in this case there were substantially less shifts in the 32 key
words, and therefore less indicators with regard to anxiety. 'Typi-
cal' responses were 'active' (-3), 'calm' (+3), 'inactive' (+3) and
'quiet' (+2).
Another respondent, L10, appears also to have conformed to a
fairly straightforward inhibition-release pattern. In fact this was
- 407 -
the respondent for whom the HAT/Q36 data was particularly inconclu-
sive (cf. pp.394-395 above). Again, though, such an interpretation
would seem to be based less on shifts in anxiety-related words than
on increased 'pleasure' scores: 'elated' (+2), 'enthusiastic' (+2),
'angry' (-2).
In L12, however, we seem to return to a more wholeheartedly
paradigm case. A very heavy response list included 'inspired' (+3)
and 'intoxicated' (+2), and there were many indicators of a classi-
cal anxiety-reduction process: 'apprehensive' (-2), 'desperate' (-3)
(1), 'downhearted' (-2), 'frustrated' (-2), 'insecure' f-2), 'ner-
vous' (-1), 'optimistic' (+2), 'overjoyed' (+2), 'pleased' (+2),
'tense' (-1), 'upset' (-2) and 'worried' (+2).
L14 indicated relatively small attitude changes, with few
responses to the 32 key words: 'frustrated' (-2), 'nervous' (-1). On
the whole the movement for this subject was towards a greater
feeling of activity, of 'inspiration'.
Similarly, L16, whose responses to the HAT exercise and during
discussion were so (problematically) enthusiastic, recorded rela-
tively few shifts in the 'anxiety' words. While 'nervous' (-2) and
'on edge' (-1) conformed to the dominant trend, only 'quiet' (+2)
and 'rebellious' (+1) gave an indication of the tensions elsewhere
evinced by this respondent.
L17 also provided few responses in relation to 'anxiety', most
shifts being concerned with an increased quiescence/drowsiness:
'elated' (-2), 'enthusiastic' (-1). One anomalous factor here was
- 408 -
the change for 'in pain'; the shift of +3, while due to an extra-
neous physical complaint, may well also have influenced the overall
pattern of response
The profile for L22 was very similar, with a few more signs of a
more 'classical' alignment: 'nervous' (-2), 'tense' (-1).
Finally, the profile for L23 again provided little data about
the 'anxiety' words, while there was a discernible conflict in
relation to the 'quiescent' effect of the screening: 'active' (-1),
'inactive' (-1). This respondent's non-enjoyment of Meaning of 
Life, itself of course consistent with a repression-model, gave rise
to the atypical scores of 'pleased' (-1) and 'irritated' (+2). L23
did, after all, record the lowest HAT total for the film.
Again, then, there is a world of difference between a statisti-
cal, 'global' description of the adjective shifts produced by our
group of respondents and a consideration of each person's individual
responses.
Though the interview material is of considerable interest and
has thrown up a number of tangential insights, it has proved very
difficult to gain any great psychoanalytic insight into individual
responses to Meaning of Life. On a 'global'/social level, however,
the combined Q36, HAT and MACL results have been stimulating. While
a great majority of the respondents denied that a sexual/excremental
component played a significant part in their appreciation of Monty
Python, there was a striking preference expressed in the Humour
Appreciation Tests for the sections containing the birth, the Sperm
- 409 -
Song, the sex-education lesson, and the exploding Mr. Creosote. The
shifts in a number of the MACL words indicated quite unambiguously
an overall reduction in anxiety/tension. Both these findings are
consistent with the repression-model of the comedic outlined in
sections 2 and 4.
Conclusion
As was foreseen in the Introduction, there remains a tension
between the theoretical/historical material which predominated in
sections 1 and 2 and the interview-based empirical data presented
and analysed in section 6. The latter in turn consists of the
'articulable' (the selected extracts from the interview transcript),
but also of some additional material (generated from Questionnaire,
HAT and MACL results) which give some access at least to the 'inar-
ticulable'.
Though the chief interest of the interview analysis lies in the
bones of what exactly the respondents had to say about Meaning of 
Life, some general points can be made.
'Novelty' and 'the clever' were identified as important elements
in the appreciation of Monty Python, as were performance, parody,
and some notion of 'attack' or mockery. In instances of arguably
tendentious humour (for example the Mr. Creosote sequence) reasons
for enjoyment most frequently given included performance and parody.
Novelty also clearly emerged in opposition to the familiar, to
repetition. Thus an original liking for the original Monty Python
TV material stressed its novelty, whereas appreciation of Meaning of
Life tended to refer rather to pleasures of familiarity. Indeed for
those respondents who either disliked the early Monty Python or were
disappointed with the film we watched, it was also often a matter of
too much shocking novelty or of too much of the same. The relative
lack of comment/surprise about the absurd elements of Meaning of 
- 411 -
Life may also in part have been due to the institutionalisation or
routinisation of absurdity, to the loss of novelty-value.
There was considerable ambivalence about the pleasure (?) of
anticipation: again there was the tension between the desire for
novelty and the comfort of repetition, the endless replaying of
Freud's fort-da game.
Most respondents showed little interest in exploring the areas
of joke/comic distinctions with respect to Meaning of Life and of
understatement as a form of exaggeration.
Several respondents were troubled by the gruesome/violent parts
of the film (particularly the Live Organ Transplants sequence), but
in practice many of them laughed nevertheless. There was in turn
some recognition of a 'release' function performed by laughter in
the face of the horrific or the gruesome. There was rather more
resistance, however, to the acceptance of laughter in the face of
'smut'. The shock-value of smut was certainly recognized, often
approvingly, but its funniness was generally denied: again elements
such as performance and satire were identified by those confronted
with the fact that they were laughing at 'smutty' humour. There
was, unfortunately, relatively little debate about the efficacy of
repeated use of 'shocking' material.
There was ambivalence with regard to the issue of sexism and
racism in Meaning of Life. Many respondents identified and
discussed 'dubious' elements/representations in the film, but again
agreed that they had found such moments funny despite feeling uneasy
about them.
Though many respondents were not reluctant to talk about their
appreciation of sexual humour in Meaning of Life (section HAT2 in
particular), an assessment of the responses was difficult. Caught
between the denial of the sexual/excremental (Questionnaire Item 36)
and an apparent valorisation of sexual humour (HAT2), the subjectS1
discourses here are an optimal mix of the articulable and the
inarticulable. In many instances it was difficult to know what
status to accord what was said; the comments of some respondents
seemed to beg for a 'symptomatic' psychoanalytic reading which would
uncover the (sexual) anxieties simultaneously allayed and kept in
place by sexual humour. Unfortunately there is not a psychoanalyst
in the house/
There was less confusion surrounding the responses in the area
of the excremental (most specifically the Mr. Creosote sequence)
(repressions relating to anality are deeper, less easily disturbed).
There was, though, the ambivalence also observed for 'violent'
humour; a "yeucchh" response was commonly accompanied by laughter.
Indeed a number of respondents enjoyed talking about how 'horrible'
and 'over the top' the episode was. The revulsion was an enjoyable
one; the section gained a high HAT score.
The most striking finding to emerge from the non-interview
material was from the comparison of Questionnaire Item 36 and the
HAT results. While the great majority of respondents had indicated
in Q36 that the violent and the sexual/excremental were relatively
- 413 -
insignificant in their appreciation of Monty Python, the HAT results
showed that sections HAT2 and HAT5 were, for our respondents, by far
the funniest parts of the film; these two sections contained the
Birth, the Sperm Song, the sex-education lesson, and the exploding
Mr. Creosote.
In view of the nature of repressions, it is scarcely surprising
that our subjects had been unable to identify the sexual/excremental
as an important source of funniness. These results are extremely
suggestive for future work on individual readings of comedy/humour
within a more rigorous psychoanalytic framework.
The above findings were supported by the marked downward shifts
observed in the Mood Adjective Check List words associated with
anxiety/tension.
Though we can regret the lack of statistical rigour accompanying
these results, I would nevertheless argue that the larger trends
outlined above can be adduced as heuristic evidence that, with the
sample of respondents used in this instance, screenings of Meaning
of Life had the 'effect' of reducing tension/anxiety. Further,
though there is no question of proof, or of any demonstrable rela-
tion in the context of this study, such a reduction of tension is
consistent with the repression-model of the comedic developed
throughout the thesis. We have also seen how this model accounts
for our other substantial finding relating reported preferences to
humour appreciation for different segments of the film.
We are left, in the end, with the irreducible difference between
the statistical/general picture and an account of individual differ-
ences. We are caught between a scientistic, necessarily hypostasis-
ing account of overall trends and a less 'scientific' accounting for
a set of 'impure' personal responses. While the insights of the
collected Q36, HAT and MACL data are certainly provocative and
useful, therefore, it is important to reaffirm, finally, the cen-
trality of (usually neglected) viewer-response interview/discussion
material in any attempt to understand the psycho-social functions of
tendentious humour.
Footnotes: Introduction
1. Quoted in Roger Wilmut, 'From Fringe to Flying Circus' (Methuen
London 1982) pg.214
2. J. Udris, 'I'm All Right Jack: The Politics of Comedy'
(Dissertation for MA degree at Polytechnic of Central London,
1982)
3. The terms 'immanence' and 'negotiation' used here are drawn
from a model in Jerry Palmer, 'The Logic of the Absurd' (BFI
London 1987) pp.19-25
4. Janice Radway, 'Reading the Romance' (University of North
Carolina Press 1984)
5. David Morley, 'The Nationwide Audience' (BFI 1980) and 'Family
Television - Cultural Power and Domestic Leisure' (Comedia,
London 1986)
Footnotes: Section 1
1. Pierre Bourdieu, 'Aristocracy of Culture' in 'Media, Culture
and Society' 1980 (2) pg.225
2. Mary Douglas, 'Purity and Danger' (Routledge & Regan Paul 1966)
pg.36. In discussing Edmund Leach's relating humour to taboo,
particularly to childlike fluidity/continuity as opposed to
'adult' fixity and rigidity, Chris Wilson notes (in our context
prematurely) that "... one must draw the exciting conclusion
that humour pinpoints the faults and inconsistencies in our
cosmologies." (Chris Wilson, 'Jokes: Form, Content, Use and
Function' (Academic Press 1979) pg.13)
3. Douglas op. cit. pg .38
4. Roland Barthes, 'Sade, Fourier, Loyola' (Seuil, Paris 1971)
pg.140
5. Sir John Harington, 'The Metamorphosis of Alax' (originally
published 1596; refs. are to 1814 edn.) pg.32
6. St. Augustine, 'De Magistro I': 'De Locutionis Significatione'
cited Jacques Lacan, 'Sgminaire I', in Laporte op. cit. pg .18
7. Dominique Laporte, 'Histoire de la Merde' (Premiere Livraison,
Paris 1978) pg.18
8. Sigmund Freud, preface to German version of John G. Bourke,
'Scatologic Rites of All Nations' quoted Laporte op. cit. pg .19
9. Michael Steig, 'Defining the Grotesque: an Attempt at
Synthesis' in 'Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism' (vol.
29) 1970
10. ibid. pg .259
11. Alan Brien, review of Monty Python's Life of Brian in 'Sunday
Times' 18.11.79
12. Mikhail Bakhtin, 'Rabelais and His World' (MIT Cambridge,
Mass. 1968) pg.18
13. ibid. pg .19
14. ibid. pg .20
15. ibid. pg .21
16. ibid. pg .25
17. ibid. pg .26
18. Pierre Bonaffg, 'Objet magique, sorcellerie et f gtichisme' in
'Nouvelle Revue de Psychanalyse' no.2 (1970) pp.166-167
19. Terry Gilliam, quoted by John Walker in 'Sunday Express Maga-
zine' 12.7.81
20. Bakhtin op. cit. pp.304-317
21. ibid. pg .317
22. ibid. pg .335
23. Melanie Klein, 'The Psychoanalysis of Children' (trans. Alix
Strachey) (International Psychoanalytic Library no.22) (Hogarth
Press London 1954) pg.291
24. Klaus Theweleit 'Male Fantasies', (Polity Press, Cambridge
1987) pg.399
25. Bakhtin op. cit. pg .376
26. Festivals of this kind are discussed in relation to comedy by
Richard Boston, 'The Anatomy of Laughter' (Collins 1974) and by
Wylie Sypher, 'Comedy' (Doubleday and Anchor, New York 1956)
27. Bakhtin op. cit. pg .10
28. Terry Eagleton, 'Walter Beniamin, or, Towards a Revolutionary
Criticism' (NLB London 1981) pg.148
29. ibid. pg .149
30. Tony Bennett, 'A Thousand and One Troubles: Blackpool Pleasure
Beach' in 'Formations of Pleasure' (RKP London 1983) pg.153
31. Alain Corbin 'The Foul and the Fragrant' (Berg Publishers Ltd.,
1986) (originally Le Miasme et la Jonquille, Eds. Aubier
Montaigne 1982). We shall have cause to refer to this source
again.
32. Norman 0. Brown is eloquent in his linking of capitalism with
radical changes in this area. "... the precipitating factors
in a psychological upheaval such as the Protestant Reformation
is not any change in toilet-training patters, but an irruption
of fresh material from deeper strata of the unconscious made
possible by a large-scale transformation of the structure of
the projective system (the culture). (Norman O. Brown, 'Life
Against Death' (RKP London 1959) pg.230. "In this dehumanized
human nature man loses contact with his own body, more
specifically with his senses, with sensuality and with the
pleasure-principle." (pg.238)
33. Richard Dyer, 'Heavenly Bodies: Film Stars and Society'
(BFI/Macmillan 1987) pg.138
34. Ernest Mandel, 'Introduction to Marxist Economic Theory'
(Pathfinder Press, New York 1979) pg.12
35. ibid. pg .13
- 418 -
36. We are here working with a model of the imaginary relation and
of ideology developed by Louis Althusser. I do not propose to
argue the finer points, but to accept the basic model.
37. Bakhtin op. cit. pg .24
38. ibid. pg .39
39. Eagleton op. cit. (1981) pg.150
40. John Cleese, quoted Wilmut op. cit. pg .151
41. Frederick Furnivall, 'The Babees Book' (1908 edition
'translated' by Edith Rickert) pg.xxx
42. This constitutes Volume I of Elias' 'The Civilizing Process'
(Basil Blackwell, Oxford 1978). cf. also Corbin op. cit.
43. Furnivall op. cit. pg .xxx
44. Erasmus, 'De Civilitate Morum Puerilium' (1530) quoted Elias
pg.130
45. Quoted in Laporte op. cit. pg .21
46. Quoted in Elias op. cit. pg .132
47. Elias op. cit. pg .151
48. Furnivall op. cit. pg .(xiv)
49. Elias op. cit. pg .138
50. The inverted commas are necessary to stress the absence of any
hygienist basis for the term in this context; also, no mention
is made in the edict of other wastes such as washing-water,
peelings.
51. Laporte op. cit. pp.20-21
52. Bourke op. cit. pg .136
53. La Morandiere (1764) quoted, Augustin Cabanes, 'Moeurs Intimes
du Passe' (Paris 1908) pg.382
54. Felix Hatin 'Essai medico-nhilosonhigue sur lee movens 
d'ameliorer l'gtat sanitaire de la classe indigente' (1832)
pg.3. cf. also Corbin pp.174, 222-223
55. Bourke op. cit. pg .134
56. Bourke quoting Cook, John Hawkesworth, 'An Account of the
Voyages Undertaken ...' vol.II (1773) pg.314
57. Quoted in Elias op. cit. pg .131
58. Quoted ibid. pg .132
-419 -
59. Elias op. cit. pg .59
60. ibid. pg .116
61. ibid. pg .118
62. Laporte op. cit. pg .31
63. Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, 'Anti-Oedipus' (University
of Minnesota Press 1983) pg.125
64. Corbin op. cit. pg .61
65. ibid. pg .143
66. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg .211
67. ibid. pg .269
68. Just as we have noted how slowly attitudes to excrement changed
between the 15th and 18th centuries, it is easy to ignore that
the further modification of this kind of practice has also been
a very slow process. The 'midnight mechanics' of North-East
England are a recent equivalent of such functionaries. At Low
Hawxley modified wheelbarrows were until recently used as
toilets to facilitate waste-disposal. (cf. Frank Graham, 'The
Geordie Nettv i (Newcastle-upon-Tyne 1977))
69. Laporte op. cit. pg .32
70. ibid. pg.32. This is echoed by Guy Hocquenghem, 'Homosexual
Desire' (Allison and Busby, London 1978) pg.83
71. Laporte op. cit. pg .33
72. Theweleit op. cit. pg .312
73. ibid. pg .419
74. Bourke op. cit. pg .138
75. Nita Clarke and Phil Evans, 'London for Beginners' ('Writers
and Readers' London 1984) pg.54
76. Elias op. cit. pg .121
77. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg.302. Klaus Theweleit also
takes up the identity of the economic and psychical instances:
"Thus a new relation becomes evident: the hostility between
worker and machine, set up by the capitalist, is identical to
the hostility the bourgeois ego reserves for the productive
force of its own unconscious." (op. cit. pg .257)
78. Elias op. cit. pg .121
79. Freedom of natural functions was perhaps coextensive with a
laissez-faire attitude to waste-disposal. Hawkesworth
describes the consequences of the King of Spain's efforts,
around 1760, to introduce privies into the households of
Madrid.
"Every class devised some objection against it, but the
physicians bid the fairest to interest the King in the
preservation of the ancient privileges of his people; for
they remonstrated that if the filth was not, as usual,
thrown into the streets, a fatal sickness would probably
ensue, because the putrescent particles of the air, which
such filth attracted, would then be imbibed by the human
body." Although the edict prevailed, "... many of the
citizens, probably upon the principles advocated by their
physicians, that heaps of filth prevent deleterious par-
ticles of air from fixing upon neighbouring substances,
have, to keep their food wholesome, constructed their
privies by the kitchen fire." (Hawkesworth op. cit.
pg.315). According to Louis-S gbastien Mercier, during
the same period in Paris latrines were also commonly to
be found very close to kitchens. (Tableau de Paris 
(1782-1788) vol.11 pg.54). For an abundance of examples
of resistance to the spread of 'hygienism', cf. Corbin
op. cit., especially pp. 211-221
80. Quoted Elias op. cit. pg .156
81. The influence of Arabic/Musulman customs in France in the last
centuries was considerable; many of the customs would now be
said to have been based on sound medical/hygienist grounds.
82. Elias op. cit. pg .135
83. ibid. pg .139
84. ibid. pg .152
85. Dyer op. cit. (1987) pg.138
86. Philippe Aries, 'L'Enfant et la Vie Familiale' (Librairie Plon,
1960) pg.105
87. Bakhtin op. cit. pg .319
88. ibid. pg .319
89. Pierre Bourdieu, 'Ce Que Parler Veut Dire' (Fayard, Paris,
1982) pg.92
90. ibid. pg .93
91. Bakhtin op. cit. pg .28
92. Eagleton op. cit. (1981) pg.146
93. Paul Eluard, quoted Laporte op. cit. pg .11
- 421 -
94. Bourdieu op. cit. (1982) pg.36
95. Louis Althusser, 'Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays' (NLB
London, 1977) pp.141 ff.
96. Elias op. cit. pg .140
97. Brown op. cit. pg .297
98. ibid. pp.297-298
99. Frangoise Dolto, 'Fragrance' in 'Sorcieres' no.5 pg.15. This
is a French feminist journal (eds. Albatros); this particular
issue contains a number of articles concerning the sense of
smell and its relation to excrement. cf . also Corbin op. cit.
pg .213
100. Mia Campioni and Liz Gross, 'Little Hans: the Production of
Oedipus' (in eds. Paul Foss and Meaghan Morris 'Language, 
Sexuality and Subversion' (Feral pubs., Darlington Australia,
1978) pg.100
101. This should of course read 'mother-figure'. My excuse is that
this would be too cumbersome/
102. Dolto op. cit. pg.12
103. ibid. pg .12
104. ibid. pg .12
105. ibid. pg .12
106. ibid. pg .12
107. ibid. pg .13
108. Gershon Legman, 'La Psychanalyse de l'Humour Erotique' (French
version of English text) (Robert Laf font, Paris 1971) pg.50
109. Hocquenghem op. cit. pg .84
110. Brown op. cit. pg .293
111. Theweleit op. cit. pg .413
112. Brown op. cit. pg .299
113. Brown goes on to assert that "contemporary social theory ...
has been completely taken in by the inhuman abstractness of the
path of sublimation, and has no contact with concrete human
beings, with their concrete bodies, their concrete though
repressed desires and their concrete neuroses." (pg.318). It
could be argued that it is not only "contemporary social
theory" that is guilty of this; in his own formulation, "behind
this scientistic pose of the psychoanalyst lies the repressed
problem of the psychoanalysis of psychoanalyst itself" (pg.
- 422 -
234). If "psychoanalysis takes the final step of showing the
origins of the myths which sustain social power and power
struggles in the repression of the human body" (pg.252), is
psychoanalysis itself exempt from the morbidity of "the
unconscious schemata governing the pursuit of knowledge in
modern civilization" (pg.236)? Hardly
114. ibid. pg .259
115. ibid. pg .253
116. ibid. pg .235
117. ibid. pg .235
118. ibid. pg .236 - Ferenczi ref. above
119. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg .170
120. Sigmund Freud, 'The Eqo and the Id' (Hogarth Press London 1927)
pg.48
121. Hocquenghem op. cit. pg .82
122. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pp.142-143
123. "... every person who pretended to nauseate the smell of
another's excretions, snuffed up his own with particular
complacency." (Tobias Smollett, 'Humphry Clinker' (Penguin
1982 edn.) pg.46. "... c'est lorsque l'inspiration lui
manquait que Michelet justement allait inspirer dans lee
latrines le remugle suffocant qui portait ien son esprit le
souffle animant, au propre comme au figure, sa creation."
(Laporte op. cit. pg .39) (Laporte's emphasis). On Michelet,
cf. also Corbin op. cit. pg .219
124. Laporte op. cit. pg.41
125. ibid. pg .60
126. ibid. pg .74
127. Patrick SUskind 'Perfume' (Penguin 1986) pp.129-130. Corbin
writes of "the baffling poverty of the language" with regard to
smells (op. cit. pg .6)
128. Laporte op. cit. pg .74
129. Brown op. cit. pg .187
130. ibid. pg .188
131. Thus "psychoanalytic symbolism ... is characterized by its uni-
versality: the symbols which translate dream wishes or neurotic
complexes are common to all peoples..." Anika Lemaire, 'Jacques
Lacan' (RKP 1977) pg.46, summarising from E. Benveniste, 'Pro-
blames de Linquistique Generale' (Gallimard, Paris 1966)
- 423 -
132.Elias op. cit. pg .150
133.Laporte op. cit. pg .105
134.Brown op. cit. pg .200
135. ibid. pg.205. cf. Erich Fromm, 'Escape from Freedom'
(Rhinehart New York 1941) pg.73
136.Brown op. cit. pg .256
137. ibid. pg .275
138. Campioni and Gross op. cit. pg .100
139. ibid. pg .100
140. ibid. pg .110
141. ibid. pg .114
142. ibid. pg .100
143.Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg .143
144.Campioni and Gross op. cit. pg.115
145. ibid. pg .103
146.Pascal Bruckner and Alain Finkielkraut, 'Le Nouveau Desordre
Amoureux' (Seuil/Points, Paris, 1977) pg.43
147. ibid. pp.40-41
148.Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg .352
149. ibid. pg .356
150. ibid. pg .292
151. Campioni and Gross op. cit. pg.114
152. ibid. pg .105, quoting Sigmund Freud 'Three Essays' (S.E.) pg.87
153. Campioni and Gross op. cit. pg .105
154.Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg.74
155. ibid. pg .45
156. ibid. pg .115
157. ibid. pg .177
158.Dolto op. cit. pp.15-16
159. ibid. pg .14
- 424 -
160. ibid. pg .14
161.John Bourke notes the difficulties experienced by large numbers
of Malays when they moved from a maritime environment to
land-based homes. Habits which had previously been no problem
now became "smelly" and "dirty". (op. cit. pg .144)
162.cf. Etienne de Bonnot Condillac, 'Traitg des Sensations' (1754)
163.Corbin op. cit. pg .288, footnote 54. cf. Edgar Bgrillon,
'Psychologie de l'olfaction: la fascination olfactive chez lea
animaux et chez l'homme', 'Revue de l'Hypnotisme' October 1908
pp.98 ff.
164.Dolto op. cit. pg .14
165.Elias op. cit. pg .127
166. ibid. pg .128
167.Laporte op. cit. pg .85
168.Pliny, 'Natural History' bk XVIII ch. V(2), cited in Laporte
op. cit. pp.81-82, 84, 86-87, 90-91. cf. also Corbin op. cit.
pp.67 & 212
169.Mircea Eliade 'Le Mythe de L'Eternel Retour s (nrf Gallimard,
Paris 1949)
170.Brown op. cit. pg .298
171. ibid. pg .271
172.Bourdieu op. cit. (1982) pg.41
173.Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg.234
174. Bourdieu op. cit. (1982) pg.36
175. ibid. pg .76
176. ibid. pg .63
177.Deleuze and Guattari refer to "the Nietzschean idea of a
language of masters through which ... enslavement is
accomplished" (op. cit. pg .208)
178.G. Lakoff, interview with Herman Parrett, University of
California mimeo, October 1973, pg.38
179. Bourdieu op. cit. pg .89
180. ibid. pg .89
181. ibid. pp.90-91
182. Bakhtin op. cit. pg .11
- 425 -
183. Laporte op. cit. pg .15
184. "y thenne Papa Turd shooke the peare-tree long sithens named
SHAKES-PEARE by ye Englysshe, and under thatte name hadd fro it
manie ffine maniuscript tragaedies" (Gershon Legman and B.
Keith, 'King Turd' (translation of Jarry's 'Ubu Roi'), 1953)
185. Laporte op. cit. pg .42
186. ibid. pg .43
187. Brown op. cit. pg .266
188. ibid. pg .287
189. ibid. pg.293. This idea surfaces, (perhaps not so)
surprisingly, in some strip-cartoons produced by Steve Bell for
the Guardian (ca. 1985) in which "the turd" replaces other
major commodities/currencies in dominating stock-market prices.
190. Brown op. cit. pp.302-303
191. ibid. pg .303
192. Geoffrey Nowell-Smith, 'In a State' in 'Screen Education'
no.30
193. ibid. pg .9
194. Laporte op. cit. pg .44
195. Bakhtin op. cit. pg .33
196. Hocquenghem op. cit. pg .82
197. ibid. pp.82-83
198. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg .142
199. In Ken McMullen's film Ghost Dance, one of the characters says:
"For a while I worked for this big company that dealt in money
... I only saw the fat bastards who eat it ... and they do eat
it, so it doesn't get stolen from them. They store it in their
bellies until it converts to money-turds, then they shit it
out, straight into the bank."
200. One of a number of documented examples of taxation which made
this 'cleansing' explicit was the 'Chrysagire', a tax on all
excrement established under the Roman Emperor Constantine. (cf.
Laporte op. cit. pg .66)
201. Laporte op. cit. pg .49
202. op. cit. pg .50
203. op. cit. pg .62
- 426 -
204. An outstanding example of this kind of literature was produced
by Pierre Leroux, a utopian socialist theorist who explicitly
recommended that every citizen should donate their excrement to
the State, which could then distribute this as free fertilizer
... presto, an end to starvation ...
"L'homme est reproducteur de sa propre subsistence."
"Tout homme est la fois producteur et consommateur et,
s'il consomme, il produit." (Leroux, Appendix to 'Aux
Etats de Jersey' (1853) pp.109-114, and 'De l'Humanitg, 
de son Principe, et de son Avenir, oil se Trouve Expose la
Vraie Dgfinition de la Religion et oa on Explique le 
Sens, la Suite et l'Enchatnement du Mosaisme et du 
Christianisme' (Paris 1840)
It would be interesting, if we recall Hocquenghem's linking of
private money with the privatization of the anus, to speculate
about how the status of the anal may be different in a
socialist economy/society. There is, however, no simplistic
equation to be made, except in the case of a strictly utopian
socialism. It has been reported that under the 'socialistic'
Pol Pot regime of Cambodia, in the labour camps where
ex-bourgeois elements were put to work, inmates were expected
to produce a minimum quantity of shit each day; those who did
not were beaten. Elsewhere, in the 19th Century,
"... the superiority (of human excrement) seemed
undisputed at that time ... 'Every kilogram of urine is
equivalent to a kilogram of wheat' declared Sponi."
(Corbin op. cit. pp.117-118)
205. Corbin op. cit. pp.115-116
206. ibid. pg .120
207. Laporte op. cit. pg .102
208. Corbin op. cit. pg .69
209. Bourdieu op. cit. (1982) pg.95
210. Laporte op. cit. pg .102
Footnotes: Section 2 
1. Sypher op. cit. pg .219
2. George Meredith, 'An Essay on Comedy;' (1897) pg.8
3. Moelwyn Merchant, 'Comedy' ('Critical Idiom' series, Methuen,
London, 1972)
4. cf. Max Eastman, 'Enjoyment of Laughter' (Hamish Hamilton,
1937)
5. Gershon Legman, 'Love and Death' (Breaking Point, New York,
1949) (pg.31)
6. Sigmund Freud, 'Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious'
(Pelican Freud Library, 1976) pg.302
7. Mick Eaton, postscript to Steve Neale, 'Psychoanalysis and
Comedy' in Screen vol.22 no.2 (1981) pg.42
8. Seymour Goodlad, 'The Social Significance of Television Comedy'
in C.W.E. Bigsby (ed.) 'Approaches to Popular Culture' (Arnold,
1976)
9. "'Traduttore - Traditorel' the words - one of the jokes
discussed by Freud ... might appropriately be emblazoned on the
title-page of the present volume." (editor's introduction,
Freud 1976 pg.34)
10. Editor's introduction to Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.36
11. Freud op. cit. (1976) pp.93-94, 125-126
12. Ibid. pg.126
13. ibid. pg .270
14. Neale op. cit. pg .34
15. Henri Bergson, 'Le Aire' (La Revue de Paris, 1900); 'Laughter'
(transl. Brereton and Rothwell) (Macmillan and Co., London,
1935) pg.88
16. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.282
17. ibid. pg .284
18. Useful extracts in Paul Lauter, (ed.) 'Theories of Comedy'
(Anchor Doubleday and Co., New York, 1964)
19. Wilson op. cit. pg .141
20. ibid. pg .9
21. John Palmer, 'Comedy (Martin Secker, London, 1914) P4.5
- 428 -
22. Bergson op. cit. pg .2
23. ibid. pg .37
24. ibid. pg .16
25. ibid. pg .29
26. ibid. pg .58
27. ibid. pg .69
28. Theweleit op. cit. pg 211
29. Bergson op. cit. pg .198
30. ibid. pg .96
31. Freud op. cit. (1976) pp.52-64 ff. and 69 ff.
32. Arthur Koestler, 'Act of Creation' (Hutchinson, London, 1964)
33. Quoted in Boston op. cit. (1974) pg.63
34. Koestler op. cit. pp.38-42
35. ibid. pg .35
36. ibid. pg.59. Koestler's model was in some ways foreshadowed by
Beattie in 1776: "Laughter arises from the view of two or more
inconsistent, unsuitable or incongruous parts or circumstances,
considered as united in one complex object or assemblage, or as
acquiring a sort of mutual relation from the peculiar manner in
which the mind takes notice of them." quoted in D.E. Berlyne,
'Laughter, Humour and Play' in Lindzey and Aronson (eds.),
'Handbook of Social Psychology' (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass,
1968) pg.800
37. Koestler op. cit. pp.64-65
38. Brian Henderson, 'Romantic Comedy Today' in 'Film Quarterly'
(Summer 1978)
39. Berlyne op. cit. pp.798-799
40. These and other examples in Boston op. cit. 1974
41. Patricia Keith-Spiegel, 'Early Conceptions of Humour: Varieties
and Issues' in Goldstein and McGhee (eds.) 'The Psychology of 
Humour' (Academic Press, New York and London, 1972)
42. Freud op. cit. (1976) pp.192-193
43. ibid. pg .176
44. There is no intention here to give any systematic account of
different psychoanalytic models of pleasure. I shall supple-
ment a basically Freudian trajectory with Lacanian terminol-
ogy/references where they seem appropriate.
45. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.178
46. Details in Sigmund Freud, 'On Metapsycholoay, the Theory of
Psychoanalysis' (Pelican Freud Library vol.11) pp.283-287
47. Lemaire op. cit. pg .52
48. ibid. pg .145
49. ibid. pp.149-150. For a brief but extremely lucid 'summary' of
Lacanian concepts, cf. Steve Burniston and Chris Weedon,
'Ideology, Subjectivity and the Artistic Text' in 'Working 
Papers in Cultural Studies' no.10 (Centre of Contemporary
Cultural Studies, University Birmingham)
50. Neale op. cit. pg .31, quoting Samuel Weber, 'The Divaricator:
Remarks on Freud's Witz' in 'Glyph' no.1, 1977, pp.22-23
51. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.193
52. Bergson op. cit. pg .70
53. ibid. pg .73
54. Koestler op. cit. pg .93
55. Freud op. cit. (1976) in.171
56. Roger Wilmut, op. cit. pg .130
57. ibid. pg .205
58. ibid. pg .222
59. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.282
60. ibid. pg .283
61. ibid. pp.138-139
62. Terry Eagleton, 'Poetry, Pleasure and Politics' in 'Formations
of Pleasure' (RKP, London, 1983) pg.63
63. Constance Penley, 'The Avant-Garde and its Imaginary' in
'Camera Obscura' no.2 pg.17
64. We leave aside here aural pleasures (music, sound-effects,
silence) and visual pleasures (colour, movement, scopophilia
and its complications) which are (albeit complexly mediated)
residues of primary sensory pleasures.
65. 'Monty Python's The Meaning of Life' (Methuen, London 1983)
- 430 -
66. cf. in particular Jean-Frangois Lyotard, 'Economie Libidinale'
(Minuit, Paris, 1975)
67. Fredric Jameson, 'Pleasure: a Political Issue' in 'Formations
of Pleasure' (RKP, London, 1983) pg.9
68. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg .49
69. Bruckner and Finkielkraut op. cit. pg .43
70. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg .216
71. ibid. pg .112
72. ibid. pg .357
73. Theweleit op. cit. pp.410-411
74. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg .306
75. ibid. pg .173
76. ibid. pg .162
77. ibid. pg .269
78. ibid. pg .312
79. ibid. pg .118
80. ibid. pg .313
81. ibid. pp.354-355
82. ibid. pg .167
83. ibid. pg .311
84. ibid. pg .334
85. ibid. pg .24
86. ibid. pg .183
87. "Dissolving human bodies appears to be the real work of the
revolution". (Theweleit op. cit. pg .238)
88. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg.296
89. Interview in 'Gay News' no.4, 1972
90. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pp.109-110
91. ibid. pg .291
92. ibid. pg .35
- 431 -
93. While Deleuze and Guattari themselves retain a toe in the
'materialist' camp, Klaus Theweleit, while applauding their
work, is scornful of attempts to materialize psychoanalysis.
"All of the lines of scientific research based purely on
ideological criticism ... and all of the theoretical
approaches that practice historical-materialist-
philosophical meta-psychological-manipulations in an
attempt to thrust Freud and Marx (or vice versa) onto a
single pedestal ... ignore the same basic idea: the
things that happen in, and to, human bodies (psychic
matter). They have no category for the
desiring-production of the unconscious, from which all
reality, 'psychic' as well as 'social', derives." (op.
cit. pg .416)
94. Desmond Morris, 'The Naked Ape' (Cape 1967). This and other
biologistic approaches are discussed in Boston op. cit. (1974)
pp.36 ff. and in Berlyne op. cit.
95. Boston op. cit. (1974) pg.27 quoting Goldstein and McGhee op.
cit. The possible health-benefits of laughter are, or course,
also a modern concern. Following a report that there had been
a drop in the average time spent laughing by French people from
19 minutes a day in 1938 and 6 mins./day in 1980 to 1 min./day
in 1987, "Le Figaro' ... points out that there is a health
hazard involved since (according to another piece of research)
laughter is tremendously therapeutic, one minute of wild
laughter ("fou rire") being worth 45 minutes of gymnastics."
(Richard Boston, The Guardian, April 9th 1987, pg.19)
96. "External determinants often cannot be perceived in a finished
object, whether that determinant be the repression that
produces a pun or the sweated labour that produces a shirt."
(Charles Eckert, 'Shirley Temple and the House of
Rockefeller', Jump Cut no.2 (July/August 1972) pg.1)
97. Eastman op. cit. pg .279
98. Boston op. cit. (1974) pg.76. Hugh Carlton-Greene,
Director-General at BBC from 1960 to 1969, was keen on
developing That Was The Week That Was: "I had the idea that it
was a good time in history to have a programme that would do
something to prick the pomposity of public figures." (quoted
Wilmut op. cit. pg .58)
99. Ref. Andy Murphy in 'The Heavy Stuff' (Class War 'theoretical
journal') no.1 (Dec. '87) pg.8
100. Jean-Claude Carriere, 'Humour 1900' (Eds. 'J'ai lu', Paris,
1963) pg.9
101. Sypher op. cit. pg .244
102. Allan Rodway, 'English Comedy' (Chatto and Windus, London,
1975) pg.23
- 432 -
103. Richard Stephenson, quoted in Berlyne pg.811. cf. footnote 138
below.
104. Wilson op. cit. pg .194
105. Eastman op. cit. pp.272-274
106. Wilson op. cit. pg .194
107. Gerald Mast 'The Comic Mind' (Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis,
1973)
108. Rosalind Coward and John Ellis, 'Language and Materialism'
(RKP, London, 1977) pg.50
109. Laura Mulvey and Peter Wollen, 'Written Discussion', 'After-
image' no.6 pg.36-37
110. Michel Marie, in 'Lectures du Film' (Eds. Albatros, Paris,
1975) pp.130-131
111. "... discussions of comedy cannot be separated from
ideological/political positions available in a class society."
Mick Eaton, 'Laughter in the Dark' in 'Screen' vol.22 no.2
(1981) pg.22
112. Eastman op. cit. pg .121
113. Rodway op. cit. pg .24
114. H.D. Duncan, 'Communication and Social Order' (Bedminster
Press, New York, 1962) pg.378
115. Wilson op. cit. pp.230-231. Something of this is caught in the
popular stereotype of the hyper-rationalist's incomprehension
of humour. One of the best examples of this has been Spock in
Star Trek/
116. Sypher op. cit. pg .222
117. Bergson op. cit. pg .197
118. Eric Midwinter, 'Make 'em Laugh: Famous Comedians and Their
Worlds' (Allen and Unwin, London, 1979) pg.14
119. ibid. pg .15
120. Eastman op. cit. pg.277. The Monty Python 'Upper Class Twit of
the Year' sketch has been reviewed as "pure satire ... all the
more effective because of its underlying contempt." (William
Davis, 'Daily Telegraph' 21st June 1974)
121. Boston op. cit. (1974) pp.32-33
122. Herbert Barry, 'Role of subject-matter in individual differ-
ences in humour' in 'Journal of Genetic Psychology' vol.35
(1928) pg.122. For further discussion of the contentious ques-
tion of humour 'preferences' related to anxiety, cf. Section 4
below.
123. Mast op. cit. pg .10
124. Quoted Duncan op. cit. pg.412. Schoenberger was editor of the
journal 'Simplicimus' in the 1930's
125. Sypher op. cit. pg .244, invoking a model of comedicity of the
'ambivalence' type (cf. footnote 241 above)
126. 'Films and Filming' April 1964 pg.9
127. Orrin Klapp, 'The Fool as a Social Type' in 'American Journal 
of Sociology' vol.45 (Sept. 1948) pg.157
128. Quoted Boston op. cit. (1974) pg.123
129. Sypher op. cit. pg .230
130. Ludwig Jekel, 'On the Psychology of Comedy' available in Lauter
op. cit.
131. Martin Grotjahn, 'Beyond Laughter' (McGraw-Hill, 1957;
paperback 1966) pg.86
132. Hobbes' 'Leviathan' quoted Berlyne pg.800
133. Grotjahn op. cit. pg .17
134. in David Nathan, 'The Laughtermakers: Quest for Comedy' (Owen,
London 1971) pg.186
135. Boston op. cit. (1974) pg.23
136. Enid Welsford, 'The Fool: His Social and Literary History'
(Faber and Faber, London, 1935) pg.314
137. ibid. pg .315
138. Richard Stephenson, 'Conflict and Control Functions of Humour'
'American Journal of Sociology' vol.56 (May 1951) pg.569
139. Mast op. cit. pg .22
140. Bergson op. cit. pg.177
141. R.E. Pen, 'Influence of a Social Factor upon Appreciation of
Humour' in 'American Journal of Psychology' vol.45 (1933). For
a more extended discussion of experimental work on humour, cf.
Section 4 below.
142. This concept and much of the model of ideology Implicitly oper-
ated here are drawn from Louis Althusser, 'Ideology and Ideo-
logical State Apparatuses' (op. cit. 1977) (cf. also footnotes
36 and 95 in Section 1 above and pp.131 ff.)
143. Sypher op. cit. pp.242-243
144.Max Beerhohm, quoted Koestler op. cit. pg .53
145.Harold Nicolson, 'The English Sense of Humour and Other Essays'
(Constable and Co., London, 1956) pg.31
146. ibid. pg .34
147.Harington op. cit. pg .19
148. 'Laughter Among Colleagues' in 'Psychiatry' vol.23 (1960) pp.
81-95. Coser's findings can be contested. Thus J. Emerson
finds (in a study of ... joking among medical personnel in
formal meetings) that senior personnel devote a far higher
percentage of their speaking time to jokes than do juniors,
whose few jokes are usually self-disparaging." (Palmer op. cit.
pg.1) The reference is to Joan Emerson, 'Negotiating the
Serious Import of Humour' in 'Sociometry' vol.32 (1969) pp.
169-181
149.Wilson op. cit. pg .214
150. ibid. pg .214
151. Sypher op. cit. pg .242
152.Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.208
153.Welsford op. cit. pg .317
154.Neale op. cit. pg .39
155.Eagleton op. cit. (1983) pg.61
156.Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.77
157. ibid. pg .166
158. ibid. pg .166
159. ibid. pg .167
160.The summary of the joke-techniques is in Freud op. cit. (1976)
pg.76
161.ibid. pg .169
162. ibid. pg .172
163.Sypher op. cit. pg .175
- 435 -
164. cf. Freud's 'The Interpretation of Dreams' (Pelican Freud
Library no.4, 1976 (II)). A summary of the dream-work and the
mechanisms of fragmentation, displacement and condensation is
given in Freud op. cit. (1976) pp.216-222. We can note again
that Bergson, without any working model of the unconscious,
intuitively grasped this: "Any play of ideas may afford us
amusement if only it brings back to mind, more or less
distinctly, the play of dreamland." (op. cit. pg .187)
165. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.223
166. ibid. pg .225
167. ibid. pg.173
168. ibid. pg .238
169. ibid. pg.230
170. ibid. pg.230
171. ibid. pg .181
172. ibid. pg .183
173. Grotjahn op. cit. pg .10
174. Eastman O. cit. pg .299
175. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.188
176. Eagleton op. cit. (1983) pg.63. This is part of a discussion
of "A terrible beauty if born" (the final line of Yeats'
'Easter 1916')
177. ibid. pg .62
178. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.147
179. ibid. pg .182
180. ibid. pg .184
181. ibid. pg .281
182. ibid. pg .291
183. ibid. pg.288. Freud seems here to oversimplify the child/adult
distinction. The socialisation of the infant begins very
early, and the laughter of superiority already presupposes rec-
ognition of the other, hence a degree of subjection to symboli-
sation, hence the incipient presence of repression mechanisms.
If the ridicule-component in joking/laughter is highest around
the age of 7 (as Kimmins has suggested in Eastman op. cit.
pg.268), it is hard to follow Freud in assuming that there is
nothing 'comic' involved. Or else Freud should have indicated
at precisely what stage he sees the relevant inhibitions as
becoming effective.
184. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.289
185. ibid. pg .288
186. ibid. pg .292
187. Eastman op. cit. pg .46
188. ibid. pg .58
189. Most of these 'laws' are commented on in Eastman op. cit. pg .19
190. ibid. pg .32
191. cf. Freud op. cit. (1976) pp.282-285
192. This is to be distinguished from the remarks made above
(pg.97) regarding the way in which tension in a given situation
can increase the enjoyment of the comedic. Here Freud is
referring specifically to the 'comic' sense, whereas the
remarks made by Herbert Barry were to be applied to jokes.
193. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.302
194. No attempt will be made here at any rigour concerning
development with respect to age. Most of the remarks will be
concerned with a phase corresponding perhaps to age 4-10 years,
when verbal symbolisation is taken for granted.
195. This is not to imply that Lacan's "theory" is itself ignorant
of this conjunctural specificity. Despite the terrain which
Lacan was working on, it is possible to assert that "The path
marked out by Lacan led in a completely different direction. He
is not content to turn, like the analytic squirrel, inside the
wheel of the Imaginary and the Symbolic, he refuses to be
caught up in the Oedipal Imaginary and the oedipalising
structure ..." (Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg .308)
196. Neale op. cit. pg.40
197. ibid. pg .41
198. Rosemary Jackson, 'Fantasy, the Literature of Subversion'
(Methuen, London/New York, 1981) pg.176
199. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pp.132-133
200. ibid. pg .161
201. ibid. pg .368
202. Philip Thomson, 'The Grotesque' (Methuen 1972) quoted in John
0. Thompson (ed.) 'Monty Python, Complete and Utter Theory of
the Grotesque' (BFI, 1982) pp.29-30
203.Colin McCabe, 'Principles of Realism and Pleasure' in 'Screen'
vol.17 no.3 (1976) pg.21
204.Arthur Kroker, David Cook, 'The Postmodern Scene: Excremental
Culture and Hyper-aesthetics' (MacMillan, 1988) pg.23
205.Wilmut op. cit. pg .197
206. Charles, 'The Clown's Functions', quoted Pollio and Edgerly,
'Comedians and the Comic Style', in Chapman and Foot (eds.)
'International Conference of Humour and Laughter' (1977)
pp.217-218
207. Quoted in Gay News no.4 (1972), in Thompson op. cit. pg .34
208.Wilmut op. cit. pg .203
209. Bakhtin op. cit. pg .422
210. ibid. pg .424
211. ibid.
212. Jackson op. cit. pg .135
213. ibid. pg.178. "Reason is the devil's bride and whore" (Brown,
op. cit. pg .213)
214.We shall refer here to the English language version of Legman's
'The Rationale of the Dirty Joke' (Grove Press, 1968) and also
to the French language version 'Psychanalyse de l'Humour
Erotique' (Robert Laf font, Paris 1971) (cf. footnote 108 of
Section 1 above)
215. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.243
216.Legman gives the following example. "Oh mama, guess what I saw
daddy and the maid doing on the bed" "Be quiet" then, after a
moment's reflection, "You wait till mama asks you". At the
supper table that night she says "Now, Johnnie, what were you
going to tell me this morning?" "Nothing, only that I saw
daddy and the maid on the bed together, doing just like you and
Uncle John did last summer when daddy was away fishing."
(op. cit. 1968, pg.59)
217.Legman op. cit. (1971) pg.51
218. ibid. pg .51
219. ibid. pg .65
220. ibid. pg .60
- 438-
221. 'Histoires de Tres Mauvais Goat' anon (Solar Ed., Paris, 1984,
pp.53 & 57)
222. transl. of Latin. "Everything unknown is taken for obscene".
This is attributed to Tacitus, quoting Galgacus. In a
different context we can note two comments by Harold Nicolson:
"It is only in England that jokes are constantly directed
against erudition, scholarship, professional knowledge, or
literary and artistic originality." "... the tendency of the
English to regard as comic, insincere or pretentious anything
which they do not happen personally to understand." (op. cit.
pp.43 & 45)
223. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.149
224. "If the dream is the guardian of sleep, comedy is the guardian
of reason in society because it makes possible confrontations
of social relationships." (Duncan op. cit. pg .393)
225. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.144
226. ibid. pg .145
227. Sypher op. cit. pg .208
228. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.145
229. Legman op. cit. (1971) pg.65. One suspects that 'difficult'
pupils, before they 'learn their place', have a far greater
awareness of the ideological function of school as institution
than is generally admitted.
230. One of Legman's examples: Three cockney kids are each given a
penny by the teacher and told to spend it and tell the class
what they got for it. Next day the first boy recites: "I
bought two chocolates for my penny and I gave my sister one."
Teacher: "Very good Alfred. And what did you get, Henry?" "I
bought walnuts. I cracked them in half very carefully and I
ate out the meats. Then I made sails out of cancelled
postage-stamps that I soaked off envelopes, and put them on the
walnut shells with matchsticks and I sold them to the other
boys for boats. I got two farthings for them." "Oh,
wonderful, Henry; that shows real self-reliant spirit,
self-help, inventiveness and thrift. And what did you do,
Willie?" "I bought a 'sossidge'. I untied one end and ate out
the meat; then I gave the skin to my father - he used it on my
mother - I shit in the skin - took it back to the butcher and
told him it was bad - he bit it - said it was - and gave me my
penny back." Willie hands the penny back to the teacher."
(Legman op. cit. (1968) pg.69)
231. Legman op. cit. (1971) pg.66
232. ibid. pg .77
233. Althusser op. cit. pg .165
- 439 -
234. ibid. pg .164
235. cf. Roe Coward and John Ellis op. cit., and Paul Q. Hirst
'Althusser and the Theory of Ideology' in 'Economy and Society'
vol.5, no.4 (Nov. 1976)
236. Coward and Ellis op. cit. pg .75
237. G. Lenne, 'La Mort du Cingma' (Eds. du Cerf, Paris, 1971) pg.12
238. Paul Q. Hirst, 'Problems and Advances in the Theory of
Ideology' in 'Opening Session of the 1st Communist University
of Cambridge (1976) pg.11
239. Terry Lovell, 'Pictures of Reality: Aesthetics, Politics and
Pleasure' (BFI, 1980) pg.14
240. ibid. pg .15
241. Theweleit op. cit. pg .219
242. The 'State' nature of these ideological systems is briefly
discussed above (pp.56-57)
243. Althusser op. cit. pg .164
244. Jackson op. cit. pg .61
245. ibid. pg .70
246. ibid. pg .72
247. Maurice Charney, 'Comedy High and Low' (Open University Pubs.)
(1978)
248. Bergson op. cit. pg .112
249. Freud op. cit. (1976) pp.278-279
250. ibid. pg .279
251. Quoting Gautier, Bergson op. cit. pg.181. Jerry Palmer (op.
cit.) argues that the logic of the absurd provides a means of
understanding all forms of comedy.
252. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.234
253. Brown op. cit. pg .256
254. Jackson op. cit. pg .144
255. ".. even when the ambition to create nonsense rather than
satire has been realized, it's possible for a friendly critic
to argue that the nonsense is powerfully good for society."
(Thompson op. cit. pg .29)
256. Jackson op. cit. pg .173
- 440 -
257. ibid. pg .175
258. This material is drawn from a seminar on 'The Sociology of
Humour' held at the University of Aston in February 1983.
259. "Modern psychiatric ideology is an adaptation - to a scientific
age - of the traditional ideology of Christian theology ... In
short, whereas in the Age of Faith the ideology was Christian,
the technology clerical, and the expert priestly, in the Age
of Madness the ideology is medical, the technology clinical,
and the expert psychiatric." (Thomas Szasz, 'Ideology and
Insanity (Pelican, 1970) pg.5) (cf. also Theweleit op. cit.
pg .483, footnote 18)
260. The latter is a deviant activity because humour/the comedic
fulfils a predominantly conservative function both on a social
and on a personal level. We can also note that Richard
Boston's newspaper report about some research on
laughter-frequency among French people (cf. footnote 95 above)
is written in a spirit of sustained levity.
261. Quoted in Robert Hewison, 'Monty Python: The Case Against'
(Eyre Methuen, London, 1981) pg.78
262. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.140
263. ibid. pg .141
264. ibid. pg .143
265. ibid. pg.144. "... Conscious language, even scientific
language, also contains many metaphors and metonymies fashioned
on the basis of profound psychological experiences common to
everyone. Sexual experiences belong within this category, and
it is often these which are brought into play by humour."
(Lemaire op. cit. pg .43)
266. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.145
267. cf. pg.41 ff. above, and also Jos von Ussel, 'L'Histoire de la
Repression Sexuelle' (Laffont, Paris, 1966)
268. At the time of writing it is unclear whether versions of the
film exist which contain this (scripted) material.
269. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.194
270. ibid. pg .183
271. Neale op. cit. pg.30. It should be stressed at this point that
we are tentatively accepting Freud's schema in its cultural 
specificity, the gender/power aspects of which still appear
largely valid. It seems that women are usually less disposed
to "tell jokes". This is anecdotally supported by my own
questionnaire returns (cf. Section 6 and Appendix 1 below for
details).
- 441 -
272. Neale op. cit. pg .30
273. ibid. pg .32
274. Bakhtin op. cit. pg.335
275. ibid. pg .335
276. ibid. pg .336 footnote
277. Colin McCabe, 'Those Golden Years' in 'Marxism Today' April
1988, pg.27
278. Psychoanalytic studies apart, Keaton is for Deleuze and
Guattari "one of the greatest artists of the desiring-machine"
(op. cit. pg .514)
279. "If the film can be said to have a theme, it has three. These
are swallows, mud and the Grail." (Penelope Gilliatt, 'New
Yorker' 5th May, 1975
280. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.141
281. Legman op. cit. (1971) pg.59. My translation.
282. Theweleit op. cit. pp.407-408
283. ibid. pg.405. "To create a platoon of killing machines, the
raw recruits must be sanitised against death and develop a
loathing for anything female" (review of Full Metal Jacket in
'New Socialist' October 1987, pg.44) For a stimulating (and
troubling) exposition of male relations to women-as-dirt, cf.
Andrea Dworkin 'Intercourse' (Arrow Books, London, 1988)
pp.198-229
284. Legman op. cit. (1971) pg.68
285. "In the lasses' bog, somebody shit in the sink. It's like: You
make me unlock the door, I'll shit in your sink ..." (pupil's
remark in Bill Cormack 'The TV Audience: Seen but Not Heard' in
'Stills' Sept./Oct., 1983, pg.49)
286. Corbin op. cit. pp.218-219
287. Article on Gilliam, 'Tinkling Symbols', 'Guardian' 6th April
1977. Among bizarre instances of Monty Python humour
prefiguring 'reality' is the sketch from one of the TV series
(restaged in And Now for Something Completely Different) in
which Terry Jones 'performs' 'Three Blind Mice' by striking a
series of (specially trained) mice with a mallet. A recent
newspaper report described how "an army instructor turned
recruits ... into a "human xylophone", making them sing out
notes as he beat them on the buttocks with a baseball bat ..."
(Guardian 27.1.88)
288. Norman Holland, 'The Dynamics of Literary Response' (Oxford
University Press, New York, 1968)
- 442 -
289. The relevance of these models (the quote is from Lacan) to
Monty Python is discussed by Thompson, op. cit. pp.10-12. The
sources are Melanie Klein, 'Some Reflections on the Oresteia'
in 'Our Adult World and Other Essays' (William Heinemann Medi-
cal Books, London, 1963) and Jacques Lacan, 'Aggressivity in
Psychoanalysis' in 'Ecrits' (selection transl. A. Sheridan)
(Tavistock, London, 1977)
290. Quoted in Thompson op. cit. pg .12
291. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg .46
292. Neale op. cit. pg .36
293. Weber op. cit. pp.25-26
294. Jean-Paul Simon, 'Le Filmique et le Comique' (eds. Albatros,
Paris, 1979)
295. Freud op. cit. (1976) pp.109-113
296. ibid. pp.113-119
297. ibid. pp.120 ff.
298. ibid. pp.111-112
299. Eastman op. cit. pg .168
300. "Displacement onto something very small was later recognized by
Freud as a characteristic mechanism in obsessional neurosis."
(Freud op. cit. 1976 pg.121 translator's footnote)
301. Robin Wood, 'The American Family Comedy' in 'Wide Angle' vol.
3, no.2, (1979) pg.6
302. Neale op. cit. pg .39
303. Quoted Eastman op. cit. pg .126
304. Mast op. cit. pg .18
305. This should not be confused with the comedic consciousness in
Brecht's own work, where the psychic energy which would
normally be expended in laughter is diverted into thought. As
Walter Benjamin comments, "there is no better starting-point
for thought than laughter; speaking more precisely, spasms of
the diaphragm generally offer better chances for thought than
spasms of the soul." (quoted in Eagleton (1981) pg.157)
306. John Ellis, 'Made in Ealing' in 'Screen' vol.16, no.1 (Spring
1975)
307. In an article about Hollywood animation, Judith Williamson
lends support to the view of Tashlin as practitioner of 'film-
esprit'. His play with the medium was "... perfectly suited to
comment on the medium itself (it is no coincidence that many of
Tashlin's gags are about sight) ...". The article cites a num-
ber of instances of visual gags which fit Simon's 'visual joke'
model. (Judith Williamson, 'Webfooted Friends' in 'New States-
man' 22nd April 1988 pp.29-30)
308. Neale op. cit. pg .41
Footnotes: Section 3 
1. For biographical and institutional histories of Monty Python,
cf. especially Roger Wilmut op. cit., Robert Hewison op. cit.,
John 0. Thompson op. cit. For an interesting discussion of
censorship, cf. Gershon Legman op. cit. (1949), Martin Baker,
'A Haunt of Fears' (Pluto Press 1984), Martin Baker (ed) 'The
Video Nasties' (Pluto Press 1984)
2. Barclay, quoted Wilmut op. cit. pg .186
3. Gilliam quoted ibid. pg .186
4. Gilliam quoted ibid. pg .233
5. ibid. pg .196
6. We need here to guard against - or at least to recognize when
we do indulge in - a kind of simplified psychoanalysis
identified by Christian Metz as the 'nosographic approach'.
Such an approach would "treat films as symptoms or as secondary
manifestations that have been partially symptomatised, from
which it is possible to 'ascend' to the neurosis of the
film-maker (or the script-writer etc.). An undertaking very
much in the classificatory spirit of medicine, even if in a
moderate form: there will be obsessional, hysterical or
perverse film-makers, and so on .../... neglect everything
except the conscious and unconscious psychism of the film-maker
as an individual ..." (Christian, Metz, 'The Imaginary
Signifier' transl. in 'Screen' vol.16, no.2, pp.32-33)
7. Michael Watts, 'The Times' 16th July 1981, quoted Thompson op.
cit. pg .8
8. Quoted Bevis Hillier, 'Sunday Telegraph Supplement' 24th Oct.
1978, in Thompson op. cit. pg .45
9. Wilmut op. cit. pg .196
10. "... Gilliam's cartoons, with their style suggestive of
Salvador Dali with a migraine ..." Wilmut op. cit. pg .204
11. Simon op. cit. pg .43
12. Jean-Paul Simon refers to a similar 'joke' created by Oskar
Fischinger: "Des 1924, Oskar Fischinger avec 'Pierrette' no.1
construisait ggalement un ,dessin anime sur ce principe de
deconstruction de la representation par l'intervention directe
du sujet de l'enunciation sous la forme de la main qui crge,
efface et lutte contre le personnage qu'elle veut dessiner."
(op. cit. pg .49)
13. Wilmut op. cit. pg .197
14. Gilliam, quoted Wilmut op. cit. pg .203
15. Gilliam, ibid. pg .203
- 445 -
16. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.203
17. Gilliam, quoted Wilmut op. cit. pg .203
18. Wilmut op. cit. pg .204
19. Jacques Aumont, 'Eisenstein: Notes Towards a Biography', in
'Camera Obscura' no.13/14 (1985) pg.69
20. Quoted John Walker, 'Sunday Express Magazine', 12th July 1981,
in Thompson op. cit. pg .40
21. Gilliam, quoted Wilmut op. cit. pg .204
22. Lacan op cit. (1948) pg.12
23. Michael Watts, 'The Times' 16th July 1981, in Thompson op. cit.
pg .8
24. Gilliam quoted Wilmut op. cit. pg .234
25. ibid. pp.234-235. Thus for example there is a 1511 woodcut by
Hans Baldung Grien showing a family, with St. Anne opening the
legs of a child to tickle its (male) genitals. (cf. Curjel's
'Holzschnitte Des Hans Baldunq Grien' Blatt 9 & 10 (1924))
26. Sigmund Freud, 'Collected Papers II' (ed. J. Riviere and J.
Strachey International Psychoanalytic Press, London, 1924-50)
pp.45-50
27. Brown op. cit. pg .209
28. Harington op. cit. pg.34. This is from the 1814 edition. It
is difficult, of course, to guess the 'status' of Harington's
treatise. To some extent at least it must have been an
elaborate joke.
29. cf. 'Monty Python and the Holy Grail (Book)' (1977) and
'Animations of Mortality' (1978) (both Eyre Methuen)
30. Bruckner and Finkielkraut op. cit. pg.43. Another way in which
such fragmentation of the body may be appropriated is in the
service of a 'post-modern body' which has left the unitary
bourgeois individualist subject behind (cf. footnote (5.15)
below for Eagleton's description of this). Eagleton also
associates Deleuze and Guattari with the drift, consistent with
post-modern ahistoricity, towards metaphysics and essentialism:
"... the schizoid hero of the revolutionary drama is by
definition unable to reflect upon his own condition, needing
Parisian intellectuals to do it for him. The only 'revolution'
conceivable, given such a protagonist, is disorder; and Deleuze
and Guattari significantly use the two terms synonymously, in
the most banal anarchist rhetoric." (Terry Eagleton,
'Capitalism, Modernism and Postmodernism' in 'New Left Review'
no.152 (July/Aug. 1985) pg.69
31. Deleuze and Guattari op. cit. pg .44
- 446 -
32. Eagleton op. cit. (1981) pg.150
33. John Coleman, 'New Statesman' 17th July 1981, in Thompson op.
cit. pg .28
34. Quoted 'The Guardian' 6th April 1977, in Thompson op. cit.
pg .25
35. Gilliam quoted Hewison op. cit. pg .95
36. Hewison op. cit. pg .23
37. Wilmut op. cit. pg .217
38. Chapman, quoted Wilmut op. cit. pg .206
39. Interview for 'Rolling Stone' 13th November 1980, quoted
Thompson op. cit. pg .51
40. Idle, quoted Hewison op. cit. pg .95
41. Interview for 'Rolling Stone' 13th November 1980, quoted
Thompson op. cit. pg .52
Footnotes: Section 4
1. A.H. Pierce, 'The Subconscious Again' in 'Journal of 
Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Method' vol.5 (1908)
quoted in Martin Orne 'On the Social Psychology of the
Psychological Experiment' in 'American Psychologist' vol.17
(1962) pg.776
2. This term will be used in the broad sense outlined in Section
2, pg.63 above.
3. Richard Young and Margaret Frye, 'Some are Laughing, some are
not - Why?' in 'Psychological Reports' vol.18 (1966) pg.747
4. Christopher Wilson, op. cit. pg.153. This book itself
constitutes something of an overview of the state of research,
and will furnish a number of references throughout this
section.
5. Singer, Gollob and Levine, 'Mobilization of Inhibition and
Enjoyment of Aggressive Humour' in 'Journal of Personality'
vol.35 (1967) pg.563
6. Byrne seems to have done a lot of work in this area and is one
of the most frequently referenced authors. His overview of the
flight-or-fight field is in 'The repression-sensitisation
scale: rationale, reliability and validity' in 'Journal of 
Personality' vol.29 (1961) pp.334-349
7. Among the material I have been unable to find are the following
pieces of work:
Donn Byrne, 'Drive level, response to humour, and the cartoon
sequence effect' in 'Psychological Reports' vol.4 (1958)
pp.439-442.
Annie Reich, 'The Structure of the grotesque-comic
sublimation', 'Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic' vol.13 (1949).
D. Pomeranz, 'The Repression-sensitisation dimension and
reactions to stress' unpublished doctoral dissertation
University of Rochester USA (1962) (includes material on use of
film in Mood Adjective Checklist studies).
Vincent Nowlis, 'Some studies on the influence of films on mood
and attitude' technical report no.7 (Jan. 1960), Office of
Naval Research, Contract no. Nonr-668 (12).
8. Vincent Nowlis, 'Research with the Mood Adjective Checklist' in
Tomkins and Izard (eds.) 'Affect, Cognition and Personality'
(Tavistock 1966) pp.352-385. cf. also Vincent Nowlis and
Russell Green, 'The Experimental Analysis of Mood' (Technical
Report no.3, Office of Naval Research) contract no. Nonr.668
(12) (1957)
9. Thus, for example, John Doris and Ella Fierman: "The S's vocal
and facial responses to the cartoons were rated by an examiner
on a 6-point scale from disapproval to pronounced pleasure."
'Humour and Anxiety' in 'Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology' vol.53 (1956) pg.59
- 448 -
10. Wilson op. cit. pg .3
11. ibid. pg .4
12. ibid.
13. ibid.
14. ibid.
15. Walter O'Connell 'The Adaptive Function of Wit and Humour' in
'Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology' vol.61 (1960)
pg.265
16. Orne op. cit. pg .780
17. Young and Frye op. cit. pg.752. For an earlier discussion of
the effect of group/individual reception-situations for humour,
cf. also Pen l op. cit.
18. Harry Gollob and Jacob Levine, 'Distraction as a factor in the
Enjoyment of Aggressive Humour' in 'Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology' vol.5 (1967) pg.371
19. These sources are among those proving difficult to locate. The
latter one is available on microfilm at the British Library.
Cattell and Luborsky, 'Personality Factors in Response to
Humour' in 'Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology' vol.42
(1947) pp.402-421
Redlich, Levine and Sohler, 'Mirth Response Test: Preliminary
Report on a Psychodiagnostic technique utilizing Dynamics of
Humour' in 'American Journal of Orthopsychiatry' vol.21 (1951)
pp.717-734
20. John Strickland, 'The Effect of Motivation Arousal on Humour
Preference' in 'Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology'
vol.59 (1958) pg.278
21. O'Connell op. cit. pg .265
22. Strickland op. cit. pg .278
23. ibid. pg .279
24. Donn Byrne, 'Some Inconsistencies in the Effect of Motivation
Arousal on Human Preferences' in 'Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology' vol.62 (1961) pg.158
25. O'Connell op. cit. pg .265
26. Earl Dworkin and Jay Efran, 'The Angered: Their Susceptibility
to Varieties of Humour' in 'Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology' vol.6 (1967) pp.233-236
27. The original paper was by C.D. Morgan and M.A. Murray, A Method
for Investigating Fantasies: The Thematic Apperception Test' in
'Archive of Neurology and Psychiatry' vol.34 (1935) pp.289-306.
Further publications central to the development of TAT include:
H.A. Murray, 'Explorations in Personality' (Oxford Press, New
York 1938) and 'Thematic Apperception Test Manual' (Harvard
U.P. Cambridge Mass 1943)
Silvan Tomkins, 'The Thematic Apperception Test' (Grune and
Stratton, New York 1947)
28. Gardner Lindzey, 'Thematic Apperception Test: Interpretive
Assumptions and related Empirical Evidence' in 'Psychological
Bulletin' vol.49 (1952) pg.1
29. Calvin Hall and Gardner Lindzey, 'Theories of Personality'
(John Wiley and Sons 1978 pg.235)
30. George Stricker, 'The Construction and Partial Validation of an
Objectively Scorable Apperception Test' in 'Journal of 
Personality' vol.30 (1962) pp.51-62
31. ibid. pg .59
32. G.S. Blum 'The Blacky Pictures: a technique for the exploration
of personality dynamics' (New York Psychological
Corporation 1950)
33. Esthur B. Frankel, 'An Experimental Study of 4 analytic themes
of Humour' (University of Michigan unpublished Ph.D. thesis
1953) pg.42
34. Nowlis op. cit. (1966) pg.356
35. ibid. pg .354
36. Wilson op. cit. pg.106. The reference is to David Singer,
'Aggression Arousal, Hostile Humour, Catharsis' in 'Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology' (Monograph Supplement) Jan.
1968 (8) pp.1-14
37. Nowlis op. cit. (1966) pg.356. The ten additional words were
careful, earnest, meticulous, serious, hungry, in pain,
intoxicated, lustful, sexy, thirsty.
38. ibid. pg .360
39. D.M. McNair and M. Lorr, 'An Analysis of Mood in Neurotics'
'Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology' vol.69 (1964)
pp.620-627
40. M. Zuckerman, 'The Development of an Affect Adjective Check
List for the measuring of Anxiety' in 'Journal of Counselling
Psycholoqy' vol.24 (1960) pp.457-462
41. R.B. Cattell and I.H. Scheier, 'The Meaning and Measurement of
Neuroticism and Anxiety' (Ronald, New York 1961)
- 450 -
42. Details and references in Nowlis op. cit. (1966) pp.375-377
43. ibid. pg .384
44. O'Connell op. cit. pg .264
45. ibid. pg.264. An interesting precursor of SAI was a method
described by R.R. Sears in 'Survey of Obiective Studies of 
Psychoanalytic Concepts' (Social Science Research Council) (New
York 1942), in which degree of repression was calculated from
the disparity between self-assessment and assessment by others.
46. One of Milan Kundera's characters speculates about the
uniqueness of life and of history:
"la vie humaine n'a lieu qu'une seule fois et nous ne pourrons
jamais verifier quelle etait la bonne et quelle etait la
mauvaise decision, parce que, dans toute situation, nous ne
pouvous decider qu'une seule fois. Il ne nous est pas donne
une deuxieme, une troisieme, une quatrieme vie pour que nous
puissions comparer diffgrentes decisions."
"'Einmal ist keinmal'. Une fois ne compte pas. Une fois c'est
jamais."
Milan Kundera, 'L'Insoutenable Legerete de L'Etre' (nrf
Gallimard, Paris 1984) pp.279-280
47. Wilson op. cit. pg .68
48. O'Connell op. cit. pg .265
49. Wilson op. cit. pg.95. In fact Freud does at one point raise
the problem of quantification: "I refer to the concept that in
mental functions something is to be distinguished - a quota of
affect or sum of excitation - which possesses all the
characteristics of a quantity (though we have no means of
measuring it)" S. Freud 'The Neuro-psychoses of Defence'
(Standard Ed. vol.III ed. Strachey, pg.60)
50. The graphical idea is developed by Wilson op. cit. pp.95-98.
The assumed linearity of the scales for probability of release
from repression and potential amusement is, of course, not
unproblematic; we shall, however, leave this particular problem
aside for the time being.
51. Wilson op. cit. pg .95
52. ibid. pg .21
53. The term 'incongruity' is being deliberately stretched here to
cover far more than was intended in the original term
'incongruity theory' (e.g. Patricia Keith-Spiegel's typology of
'theories'; cf. pg.72 above).
54. D.I. Kenny, 'The contingency of Humour Appreciation on the
stimulus-confirmation of Joke Ending Expectations' in 'Journal
of Abnormal and Social Psychology' vol.51 (1955) pp.644-648
55. M. Godkewitch, 'Verbal, Exploratory and Physiological Responses
to Stimulus Properties underlying Humour' (unpublished Ph.D
thesis University of Toronto, 1974)
56. Wilson op. cit. pg .33
57. G. Nerhardt, 'Humour and Inclination to Laugh: Emotional
Reaction to Stimuli of Different Divergence from Range of
Expectancy' in 'Scandinavian Journal of Psychology' vol.11
(1970) pp.185-195
58. Wilson op. cit. pg .34
59. S. Ertel, 'Eine Psvchologische Theorie des Komischens,
(Habilitations Vortrag University of Munster 1968)
60. Wilson op. cit. pp.36-37
61. ibid. pg .65
62. ibid. pg .73
63. ibid. pg .126
64. Gollob and Levine op. cit. pg .372
65. Spiegel, Brodkin and Keith-Spiegel, 'Unacceptable impulses,
Anxiety and the Appreciation of Cartoons' in 'Journal of 
Prolective Techniques and Personality Assessment' vol.33 (1969)
pp. 154-159
G.C. Rosenwald, 'The Relation of Drive Discharge to the
Enjoyment of Humour' in 'Journal of Personality' vol.32 (1964)
pp.682-697
Grizwok and Scodel, 'Some Psychological Correlates of Humour
Preferences' in 'Journal of Consulting Psychology' vol.20
(1956) pg.42
66. Wilson op. cit. pp.99-100
67. Byrne op. cit. (1961) pg.158 footnote.
68. Wilson op. cit. pp.101-102. The reference is to Epstein and
Smith, 'Repression and Insight as related to Reaction to
Cartoons' in 'Journal of Consulting Psychology' vol.20 (1956)
pp.391-395
69. The differences between the experiments are discussed by Byrne
Op. cit. (1961) (footnote 4.24 above)
70. O'Connell op. cit. pg.263. He also refers to the common
"erroneous implication that psychoanalytic theory considers
that the neurotic is not hostile" (pg.268)
71. ibid. pg .263
72. Rosenwald op. cit. cited in Wilson op. cit. pg .100
- 452 -
73. O'Connell op. cit. pg .268
74. Singer, Gollob and Levine op. cit. pg .563
75. ibid. pg .567
76. Wilson op. cit. pg .105
77. Freud op. cit. (1976) pg.166
78. Strickland op. cit. pg .280
79. ibid. pg .280
80. Wilson op. cit. pg .107
81. Young and Frye op. cit. pg .751
82. The transmission of March 29th 1986 contains a particularly
good instance of direct-to-camera provocation.
83. Strickland op. cit. pg .279
84. ibid. pg .278
85. Byrne op. cit. (1961) (footnote 4.24 above) pg.158
86. ibid. pg .159
87. O'Connell op. cit. pg .263
88. ibid. pg .265
89. Adjustment scores were obtained by means of Self-Activity
Inventory (SAI) (O'Connell op. cit. pg .264, cf. also pg.186
above)
90. ibid. pg .264
91. Not that it may not be true; it would just have been an
unexpected - and rather tortuous - piece of evidence
92. O'Connell op. cit. pg .269
93. ibid. pg .268
94. Dworkin and Efran op. cit. pg .233
95. O'Connell op. cit. pg .263
96. Donn Byrne, 'The Relation between Humour and the Expression of
Hostility' in 'Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology'
vol.53 (1956) pp.84-89
97. Singer op. cit. pg .1
98. Wilson op. cit. pg.110
- 453 -
99. ibid. pg .228
100. ibid. pg .151
101. For a discussion of various possible strategies for
reappropriating 'pleasure' for the left, cf. Jameson Op.
pp.1-14
102. cf. Freud (1976) pp.47-131
103. Wilson op. cit. pg .115
104. ibid. pg .129
105. ibid. pg .130
106. Doris and Fierman op. cit. pg .61
107. Wilson op. cit. pg .125
108. ibid. pg .125
109. Legman, op. cit. (1968)
110. Wilson op. cit. pp.172-173
111. ibid. pg .180
112. cf. Klapp op. cit. pp.157-162 and Boston op. cit. (1974)
113. Wilson op. cit. pg .181
114. ibid. pg .229
115. It is true that there are a number of pertinent differences
between Bruce's case and that of the Pythons. Live performance
involves a more 'direct' relation with the audience than
literature, sound recordings, TV or film. The Monty Python
team all came from social (and, mostly, educational)
backgrounds where prudence would have been a cardinal virtue,
and despite the wilful kicking against convention of much of
the Monty Python material, the residual sensibleness of playing
safe by the Law (if not by Aunt Sallies such as the BBC) was
only to be expected. It is also worth noting that, since the
Obscene Publications Acts of 1959 and 1964 do not cover film
and TV, the various ,brushes over 'obscenity', 'blasphemy' and
'excessive violence' took place within the relatively protected
confines of the BBC or else took the form of civilized
exchanges with the British Board of Film Censors
116. For details of these sketches and a detailed review of Monty
Python's experiences with the Law and with censorship, see
Hewison. op. cit.
117. A.R. Radcliffe-Brown, 'On Joking Relationships' in 'Africa'
vol.13 (1940) pp.195-210
- 454 -
118. Wilson op. cit. pg .145
119. ibid. pg.145. He is referring to La Pave, 'Superiority,
Enhanced Self-Esteem, and Perceived-Incongruity Humour Theory'
in Chapman and Foot (eds.) 'Humour and Laughter: Theory, 
Research and Applications' (Wiley, London 1976)
120. Wilson op. cit. pg .230
121. ibid. pp.189-225
122. Jonathan Gutman and Robert Priest, 'When is Aggression Funny?'
in 'Journal of Personality and Social Psychology' vol.12 (1969)
pp.60-65
123. Gutman and Priest's results, which are otherwise of interest,
must be compromised by the use of only four jokes (one of each
type) and by the possibility that "Gutman and Priest's
manipulations of the characters of the butts were weak, and
probably had limited relevance for the subjects. The
characters in the jokes were fictional and were depicted
tersely." (Wilson op. cit. pg .205)
124. Gutman and Priest op. cit. pg .62
125. ibid. pg .163
126. Wilson op. cit. pg .138
127. ibid. pg .205
128. R.C. Mannell, 'Social Iniustice, Retaliatory Equity, and
Vicarious Superiority Humour'. Paper presented at
International Conference on Humour and Laughter, Cardiff 1976
129. Gutman and Priest op. cit. pg .63
130. Wilson op. cit. pg.133. The other references are to William
James, 'The Principles of Psychology' (vol.1) (Henry Holt New
York 1890) and Wolff, Smith and Murray, 'The Psychology of
Humour I: A Study of Responses to Race-Disparagement Jokes , in
'Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology' vol.28 (1934)
pp.341-365
131. Wilson op. cit. pg.136, referring to Zillman and Cantor,
'Resentment towards Victimised Protagonists and Severity of
Misfortunes they suffer as Factors in Humour Appreciation' in
'Journal of Experimental Research in Personality' vol.6 (1973)
pp.321-329
132. Wilson op. cit. pg .205
133. Gutman and Priest op. cit. pg .64
134. O'Connell op. cit. pg .263
135. ibid. pg .265
- 455 -
136. ibid. pg .267
137. ibid. pg .268
138. Wilson op. cit. pg .125
139. ibid. pg .121
140. ibid. pg .121
141. For details of the jokes used, cf. Gutman and Priest op. cit.
pg .61
142. One of the 'high-aggression' cartoons is described: "A husband
and wife are fighting viciously in the presence of two guests.
The woman guest leans over and whispers to her husband: I've
heard they don't get along very well" (Gollob and Levine op.
cit. pg .370)
143. One example of such humour is the extracts from a 'Kipper Kids'
performance which turn up in Fassbinder's Teater in Trance
(1981) and in Werner Schroeter's Dress Rehearsal (1980). We
see a naked man and woman performing a comedy act on stage,
surrounded by and liberally covered in what looks like shit.
The verbal humour is elaborate and arguably funny in its witty
use of intellectual material.
144. Research becomes much more complicated in something like
satire, where there is a very real possibility that (large)
parts of the audience may radically misinterpret the aim of the
humour, or indeed fail to detect any humorous intent at all.
"One way the satirist may fail ... is by making a fool of the
audience rather than the intended victim" (Wilson, op. cit. pp.
199-200). Satire can also be (mis)appropriated by its very
targets via 'oppositional reading'. Thus in France Guy Bedos
was obliged to stop performing his caricature of anti-Algerian
racism when the act became very popular among racists In a
similar way the Alf Garnett of BBC TV's Till Death Us Do Part 
became uncontrollably popular, as has, more recently, the
Loadsamoney character created by Harry Enfield on Saturday
Night Live. The counterproductivity of the latter media image
was the subject of a Guardian editorial of 30th April 1988.
145. Doris and Fierman op. cit. pg.60. The footnote explains,
"Understanding of the Cobean cartoon required that one be able
to recognize the appearance of an oriental eunuch. The
Kovarsky cartoon required that one have some familiarity with
the Cobean 'undressing' theme."
146. Gollob and Levine op. cit. pg .371
147. Wilson op. cit. pg .128
148. Nowlis op. cit. (1966) pg.370
149. Orne op. cit. pg .778
- 456 -
150. ibid. pg .779
151. ibid. pg .779
152. This is another danger of the common practice of setting up an
experiment to validate a hypothesis (cf. pg.224 above).
153.Orne op. cit. pg .780
154.Gollob and Levine op. cit. pg .371
155.Wilson op. cit. pg .131
156. ibid. pg .202
157.O'Connell op. cit. pg .267
Footnotes: Section 5 
1. Radway op. cit. cf . footnote no.4 of Introduction.
2. In this I am probably already distancing myself (for pragmatic
reasons?) from much of the kind of research considered in
Section 4 above.
3. Karl Erik Rosengren and Swen Windahl, 'Mass Media Consumption
as a Functional Alternative' in Denis McQuail (ed.) 'Sociology
of Mass Communications' (Penguin 1979) pg.167
4. Radway op. cit. pg .89
5. ibid. pg .91
6. If the women studied by Radway claimed to have been
"transformed by their hobby" (op. cit. pg .213), this certainly
brings into play some notion of the effectivity of the reading
material and the women's conscious use of the novels. (cf.
also footnote 5.57 below)
7. Morley op. cit. (1980 I) pg.2
8. James Halloran (ed.) 'The Effects of Television' (Panther,
London 1970) pg.17
9. ibid. pp.18-19. Thus a BBC audience research questionnaire
sent out to viewers to assess responses to the 1975 'Days of 
Hope' series "... stemmed from the concept of the audience as
active and selective, manipulating rather than being
manipulated by the programme's message" (BBC Audience Research
Unit, 'Communication: A Case Study of 'Days of Hope" in
'Annual Review of BBC Audience Research Findings' no.4
1976/1977 (BBC 1978) pg.63
10. 'The text' here refers to the ensemble of discourses
constituting the artefact (film, book etc.), heuristically
distinct from the viewing/reading subject. No post-
structuralist grand texts here
11. cf. (among a mass of literature) Paul Willemen, 'Voyeurism, the
Look and Dwoskin' in Afterimage 6 (Summer 1976), Laura Mulvey,
'Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema' in Screen vol.16, no.3
(1975), Jean-Louis Baudry 'The Apparatus' in Camera Obscura
no.1 (1976), and the work of Stephen Heath. It is clear that
the relation between reader and literary text is of quite
another order.
12. Colin McCabe 'Realism and Cinema: notes on some Brechtian
Theses' in Screen vol.15, no.2 (1974)
13. Ian Connell and Richard Paterson, 'The Politics of Viewing'
(compilation paper for BFI Summer School 1981) pg.7
14. ibid. pg .7
- 458 -
15. McCabe op. cit. (1976) pg.25. It may be argued that the
bourgeois individual subject is itself in the process of being
left behind. Though he also argues for the continued relevance
of that subject, Terry Eagleton describes another process:
... it is surely arguable that late capitalism has decon-
structed such a subject much more efficiently than meditations
about 'ecriture'. As post-modernist culture attests, the con-
temporary subject may be less the strenuous monadic agent of an
earlier phase of capitalist ideology than a dispersed,
decentred network of libidinal attachments, emptied of ethical
substance and psychical interiority ... The 'unified subject'
looms up in this light as more and more of a shibboleth or
straw target, a hangover from an older liberal epoch of capi-
talism, before technology and consumerism scattered our bodies
to the winds as so many bits and pieces of reified technique,
appetite, mechanical operation or reflex of desire." (op. cit.
(1985) pg.71)
16. McCabe op. cit. (1976) pg.25
17. ibid. pg .21
18. cf. Colin McCabe 'The Politics of Separation' in 'Screen'
vol.16, no.4 (1975)
19. It is within such a perspective of non-hierarchisation of
dicourses that 'The Nightcleaners' has been thus described "...
a film which radically challenges the assumptions behind this
practice of cinema ... undoubtedly the most important political
film to have been made in this country." (Claire Johnston and
Paul Willemen, 'Brecht in Britain - the Independent Political
Film' in Screen vol.16, no.4 (1975) pg.104
20. Sylvia Harvey, 'May '68 and Film Culture' (BFI 1978) pg.78
21. Among them Richard Collins and Vincent Porter, 'WDR and
Arbeiterfilm: Fassbinder, Ziewer and others' (BFI 1981) pg.102
22. Hardy, Johnston and Willemen, quoted in Connell and Paterson
op. cit. pg .10
23. David Morley, 'Texts, Readers, Subjects' in Stuart Hall,
Dorothy Hobson, Andrew Lowe and Paul Willis (eds.) 'Culture
Media, Language' (Hutchinson, London 1980) pg.171
24. "Ce	 qui s'approche du texte est dja lui-mame une
pluralite d'autres textes, de codes infinis" (Roland Barthes,
S/Z (eds. du Seuil, Paris 1970)) pg.16
25. Stuart Hall, 'Encoding and Decoding in the TV Discourse'
(occasional paper, CCCS Birmingham 1973). David Morley 1980
(footnote 5 in introduction)
26. We can note here the way in which a number of Radway's
respondents ignored, discarded or mutilated books which did not
conform to their preferred decoding strategies (Radway op. cit.
pg .70 ff.)
- 459 -
27. Martin Kohli, Barbara Dippelhofer-Stiem, Barbara Pommerehne,
'Workers watch 'Workers' Films" in Leviathan vol.4, no.3
(1976) (trans. Sheila Johnston) pg.40
28. Radway op. cit. pg .62
29. ibid. pg .86
30. ibid. pg .89
31. ibid. pg .210
32. ibid. pg .7
33. For Deleuze and Guattari's schizo, any meaning is possible.
"It's anything you want it to be, as long as it works." (op.
cit. pg .109) Meaning is thus nothing other than use. "How it
works is the sole question." (pg.180) More precisely, "The
exegetical meaning (what is said about the thing) is only one
element among others, and is less important than the operative
use (what is done with the thing) ..." (op. cit. pg .181)
34. Francesco Casetti, 'Looking for the Spectator' in Iris vol.1,
no.2 (1983) pg.25 (footnote)
35. ibid. pg.22. Some of the difficulties of the semiological
model of encoding/decoding are discussed by David Morley, 'The
Nationwide Audience: a Critical Postscript' in 'Screen
Education' (no.39, Summer 1981) and will be taken up below.
36. Radway op. cit. pg .11
37. Two particularly useful texts appear to be Jane Tompkins (ed.),
'Reader Response Criticism: from Formalism to Post-
Structuralism' (John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore 1980)
and Stanley Fish 'Is There a Text in the Class? The Authority
of Interpretive Cummunities' (Harvard University Press,
Cambridge Mass. 1980)
38. David Morley op. cit. (1981) pg.11
39. Stuart Hall et al, 'Recent Developments in English Studies' in
'Culture, Media and Language' (Hutchinson 1980)
40. Morley op. cit. (1981) pg.11
41. S. Suleiman and I. Crossman (eds.) 'The Reader in the Text'
(Princeton University Press 1980) pg.32
42. Morley op. cit. (1981) pg.3
43. Radway op. cit. pg .86
44. ibid. pg .10
45. ibid. pg.9. This kind of exercise can then be seen as a con-
tribution to "the ethnography of reading" (Morley op. cit.
(1981) pg.13)
46. Jean Rouch, quoted in Mick Eaton, 'Anthropology - Reality -
Cinema' (BFI 1979) pg.48
47. Eaton ibid. pg .48
48. Radway op. cit. pg .78
49. ibid. pg.210. "The world passes through the lens of our
cognition; whatever is necessary and hence foundation-worthy in
it, owes this status to the lens, not to itself: so philosophy
must scrutinize the lens, our selves, our cognitive powers"
(Ernest Gellner, 'Legitimation of Belief' (Cambridge University
Press 1974) pg.29
50. Radway op. cit. pg.210
51. Put differently, there is no possibility of a truly scientific
discourse since this would only be possible for a subject
outside ideology: no such human subject exists. (cf. Louis
Althusser, 'Ideology and the State' op. cit. pp.159-162)
52. Radway op. cit. pg .50
53. ibid. pg .120
54. op. cit. pg .11
55. op. cit. pg .189
56. cf. McCabe op. cit. (1974)
57. Radway op. cit. pg.189. With the 'as if' we are again in the
realms of ideology as unconscious. "This means that they are
subjects because they are constituted 'as if' they constituted
themselves ... the subject lives 'as if' it were a subject, and
through the 'as if' it really does have a determinate effect."
(Paul Q. Hirst, op. cit. (1976) pp.12-13 cf. footnote 2.238
above). 'Determinate effects' can be said to be present in the
case of the romance readers if, as they claim, they have been
"transformed by their hobby" (Radway op. cit. pg .213)
58. Radway op. cit. pg .189
59. George F. Custen, 'Fiction as Truth: Viewer Use of Data about 
the 'Real' World' (summary article based on unpublished thesis)
60. "For the viewer, constructing the story takes precedence; the
effects of the text are registered, but its causes go
unremarked ... The spectator simply has no concepts or terms
for the textual elements and systems that shape responses. It
is the job of theory to construct them, the job of analysis to
show them at work." (David Bordwell, 'Narrative in the Fiction
Film' (Methuen 1985) pg.48)
- 461 -
61. Radway op. cit. pg .190
62. Morley op. cit. (1981) Pg-S
63. Radway op. cit. pg .190
64. Barthes op. cit. pg .10
65. Radway op. cit. pg .197
66. ibid. pp.134-139
67. ibid. pg .138
68. ibid. pg .62
69. ibid. pg .86
70. ibid. pg .210
71. ibid. pg .210
72. ibid. pg .199
73. ibid. pg .54
74. ibid. pg .187
75. ibid. pp.75 ff., 94-95
76. ibid. pg .184
77. ibid. pg .100
78. Ibid. pg.117
79. Midwinter, op. cit. pg.14. This is also reminiscent, though in
a more user-active mode, of the kind of 'pessimistic mass-media
thesis' common in the 1950s. Thus "... the term 'narcotizing
dysfunction' was coined by Merton and Lazarsfeld to refer to an
apparent tendency of audiences to accept the vicarious media
experience as a substitute for actually doing anything about
social or political problems" (Denis McQuail, Jay Blumler, J.R.
Brown, 'The Audience of Mass Communications' in McQuail op.
cit. pg .139)
80. Radway op. cit. pg .186
81. ibid. pg .191
82. On the testability in general of theories of knowledge, cf.
Gellner op. cit. pp.32-39. In considering the Marxist-
materialist alternative to Hegelian idealism, (the latter
"actually excludes the very idea of prediction and thus,
indirectly, of testing"), Gellner observed that "Marxists do
not improve on this aspect of Hegelianism. They merely replace
the mystique of contemplation by a mystique of 'practice', the
- 462 -
name for a most elusive but conspicuously uncheckable kind of
validation of knowledge" (pg.36)
83. Radway op. cit. pg .212
84. This is a reference to some work which originally formed part
of this section but which was jettisoned. Rosengren and
Windahl (op. cit. cf . footnote 5.3 above) developed a typology
of methods of need-satisfaction, where functional alternatives
are the different (alternative) ways in which a given need may
be satisfied. Rosengren and Windahl used their model to look
at the ways in which individual and social (environmental)
influences could define the ways in which television fulfils
needs, in particular the need for social interaction. Motives
for seeking functional alternatives could then include 'compen-
sation', 'escape', 'vicarious experience'. In order to ascer-
tain which functional alternative television was being used
for, it would then be necessary to situate the subject(s) both
psychoanalytically and socially.
85. Radway op. cit. pg .221
86. ibid. pg .217
87. ibid. pg .217
88. Gellner op. cit. pg.34
89. Radway op. cit. pg .217
90. ibid. pg .10
91. ibid. pg .50
92. ibid. pg .78
93. ibid. pg .61
94. ibid. pg .62
95. ibid. pg .48
96. Custen op. cit. pg .9
97. Morley op. cit. (1981) pg.9
98. Radway op. cit. pg.60. She is here discussing some general
reading statistics emerging from the work of Yankelivich,
Skelly and White.
99. Radway op. cit. pp.135-140
100. ibid. pg .158
101. ibid. pg .158
102. Though this remains an attractive approach, the practical
obstacles would seem insurmountable in a study such as this.
cf . footnote 84 above.
103.Morley op. cit. (1981) pg.10
104.Colin McCabe op. cit. (1975) pg.51
105.Morley op. cit. (1981) pg.12
106. ibid. pg .13
107.Custen op. cit. pg .8
108.Casetti op. cit. pg .29
Footnotes: Section 6
1. This broad body of work would include that of David Morley (op.
cit. (1980 I) and 1986; cf. footnote 5 in introduction), Stuart
Hall, e.g. 'Culture, the media, and the ideological effect' in
Curran, Gurevitch and Woollacott (eds.) 'Mass Communication and
Society' (Arnold, London 1977), and the BFI monograph on Coro-
nation Street (1981).
2. David Buckingham, 'Children and Television: an Overview of the
Research' (BFI Summer School paper 1987) pg.5
3. ibid. pg .6
4. ibid. pg .8
5. Robert Hodge and David Tripp, 'Children and Television' (Polity
Press 1986) pp.41-42. The exemplary work carried out by Hodge
and Tripp on how non-verbal responses modify what is said by
respondents is the kind of thing which was beyond my means in
this research. It was clear in listening to the discussion
tapes that there were points at which a video record of the
respondents would have given interesting insights into how/why
conversations followed the paths they did. Instances in which
groups of respondents generated 'tendentious' humour of their
own would have been especially interesting to observe. Thus
for example in relation to toilet humour one respondent said,
"... you know people still find it funny; whether it's an area
that people still feel embarrassed about and therefore they
need that release periodically ..." (loud laughter) (Appendix
4 pg.104)
6. Buckingham, op. cit. pg .14
7. ibid. pg .16
8. For a discussion of Radway's work and its significance for
film/TV studies which makes many of the points raised in
Section 5 above, cf. Ann Gray: 'Reading the Audience', 'Screen'
vol.28 no.3 (Summer 87). Thus "... her methodological
intervention is of tremendous importance to studies of the
consumption of popular ... culture in general ..." (pg.34).
For a further discussion of the usefulness of Radway's approach
(and some of the problems thrown up by her method) cf. Valerie
Walkerdine 'Video Replay: families, films and fantasy' in V.
Burgin, J. Donald, C.. Kaplan (eds.) 'Formations of Fantasy'
(Methuen London/New York 1986)
9. The final page of each questionnaire enabled respondents to
select the most convenient date/time from the list.
Questionnaires prefixed 'L' were sent to respondents who were
likely to attend a screening at Tavistock Square; the
dates/times were those for which the resource had been booked.
Questionnaires prefixed 'H' were sent to local respondents with
a list of dates/times at which they could come to a session at
my home.
- 465 -
10. For an attempted content-analysis of the Boulting brothers' I'm
All Right Jack, in which some 1300 'comedic elements' were
identified, cf. J. Udris op. cit. (footnote 2 in introduction)
11. The book of the film, 'Monty Python's The Meaning of Life'
(Methuen London 1983) contains for the most part a fairly
accurate text and a lot of nice pictures.
12. cf. pp.13 & 165-167 above. cf . also Theweleit (op. cit.) on
Luther's unwitting complicity in the development of modern
forms of repression, of new ways of damming the streams of
desire: "Luther tanned his own hide with a whip in an attempt
to acquire the kind of armour the Western 'ego' now needed as a
habitation." (pg.322)
13. The executives in this meeting include some of the Python team,
and are given names in the text of the book of the film. As
we have noted, all the executives in the 'Crimson Permanent
Assurance' section are played by non-Pythons. Oddly, however,
while there is a credit list for the CPA section, there are no
credits at the end of the book for the executive meeting
sequence in the body of the film.
14. cf. Sections 4 and 5 above for a more detailed discussion of
the problems associated with different modes of audience
research.
15. We can note here one or two of the problems encountered in
running such a discussion. Having made a prior decision not to
'censor' myself, and to participate, to some extent at least,
in the discussion, I found that there were occasions when the
result was a kind of 'prompting' (don't you think that ...).
Thus on anticipation: "It was noticeable as well that you
actually laughed before the film started .../... but I noticed
that there was a laugh as soon as that first title, shot came
up ..." (App.4 pg.3); on performance: "... something you
mentioned before as well, was the performance ..." (App.4 pg.
12); on the idea of a 'good joke': "... but it can also be I
think something to do with ... how good a joke it is ..."
(App.4 pg.14); on shock laughter with regard to the use of the
word 'penis': "... I still want to pursue it a little further
... do you feel that just mentioning 'penis' or whatever would
raise a laugh? .." The significance of respondents' comments
needs (in some instances) to be seen in this light. It is also
noticeable that I spoke rather more on the first (trial run)
tape, with Hl. There was also some explicit discussion of the
'experimental' context: "... do you think the fact that you
were part of an experiment had any effect on your appreciation
..." (App.4 pg.32), "... what effect do you think watching it
here in this context has ..." (App.4 pg.91). On a few
occasions some details were revealed about the object of the
research. Generally this tended to happen near the end of a
session (with Hll and 13, App.4 pg.62, and with L13 and 16,
App.4 pp.77/78), and in one case the respondents were
interested in learning more about Freud's joke/comic
distinction (with L5, L12 and L14, App.4 pp.110/111).
- 466 -
16. cf. pp.51-53 above, and Pierre Bourdieu 'Distinction: A
Critique of the Judgement of Taste' (transl. R. Nice, Harvard
U.P. Cambridge, Mass, 1984). Bourdieu has shown how difficult
it is to sift through the demography of socioeconomics/class
and of educational/cultural preferences to arrive at a
satisfactory index of cultural capital. For a critique of
Bourdieu's work in this field, cf. John Frow, 'Accounting for
Tastes: Some Problems in Bourdieu's Sociology of Culture' in
'Cultural Studies' vol.1 no.1 (Jan.'87) pp.59-73
17. For a fuller account of the questionnaire data, cf. Appendix 1.
18. Throughout the remainder of this section, all references to
Appendix 4 will consist of the respondent number followed by
the page number in the Appendix. In the interests of brevity,
also, not all relevant/appropriate respondent comments will be
quoted in full, and 'hedges' ("you know", "sort of" etc.) will
generally be omitted. My own interventions will be signalled
by 'Q'.
19. cf. footnote 6.14 above, and Appendix 4 pg.110-111
20. Eastman op. cit. pg .168
21. "It is only when exaggeration goes beyond some humanly
reasonable bounds that it makes you want to laugh" (Eastman op.
cit. pg .169)
22. It is worth reflecting in this context on how comfortable we
feel with gross caricatures of political and other figures with
whom we feel empathy; (cf. pp.219-220 above on "affiliated
objects").
23. The degree of playfulness or 'seriousness' can, as we have
noted (pg.91 above), be seen as an index of the effectiveness
of a satire. It is only at the moments that Monty Python/
Meaning of Life is not playful at all and shows contempt for
its target that it could be said to qualify as satire.
24. The psychoanalytic argument apart, the whole notion of generic
pleasure (and indeed the very definition of 'genre') would
appear to depend upon innovation within a framework of secure
repetitive convention.
25. Thus for example respondent L17, while not really enjoying
Meaning of Life, felt that her interest had been sustained
because she "... like(s) the personas of the people in Monty
Python anyway, I like seeing them in other things ... like Eric
Idle in The Mikado, even though I don't know them at all ..."
(L17,23). Another respondent found Michael Palin attractive.
(L12,106)
26. Richard Dyer 'Stars' (BFI 1982) pg.151
27. Ibid. pg.152
28. ibid. pg .153
- 467 -
29. As was noted by another respondent (L16), the parodic reading
of this sequence is also linked to recent (1987) news reports
of illegal organ trafficking in South America.
30. Wilmut op. cit. pg .213
31. As noted above (pp.93-94), it is possible to analyse the
deformations of a primary scopophilia in a psychoanalytic
framework. There is no attempt to do so here.
32. This term is not being used here in its more precise
psychoanalytic sense, according to which identification is a
structural effect of a certain kind of text, and is
fundamentally unconscious. Such identification would, of
course, have been occurring in the case of Meaning of Life, but
a proper analysis is not possible here.
33. "Walking down a street in Copenhagen he saw a very well-dressed
conventional couple parading arm in arm, with them was a
snowy-white poodle with a plaster stuck over its bottom.
'Amazing, isn't it - when I draw that people will say "ah,
that's not life"'" (Guardian, 6.4.1977, quoted Thompson op.
cit. pg .25). The poodle with the plaster over its bottom duly
appears in Brazil.
34. cf. pp.110, 116-120 & 136-138 above. There were points during
the recorded tapes at which audible amusement/laughter seemed
to be in response specifically to an evoked or remembered
absurdity. Some discussion of absurdity may also/already have
been dealt with under the 'exaggeration' heading (cf.pp.
298-300 above)
35. Meaning of Life contains relatively little of Gilliam's
flights-of-fancy animation which, in the TV programmes, had
been an important contribution and had conferred a strong
excremental flavour. It will therefore not be possible to
follow up some of the speculations thrown up in pp.158-168
above.
36. It is possible to debate whether humour aimed at Jews is
'racist'; the characteristics upon which such humour is based
are usually religious rather than racial. Here I shall only
note that one Jewish respondent accepted the term. "... it's
all right, I can say it, I'm Jewish ..." (L6,89)
37. 'Derek and Clive' tapes and records were recorded around the
late 1960's by Peter Cook and Dudley Moore. For these they
assumed the characters of Pete and Dud (from their Not Only But
Also TV series) and proceeded to drink (more than) liberally.
In the resulting material the comedic effect of absurdity tends
to be sacrificed in exchange for the shock value of
straightforward obscenity. It would be very interesting to
study comedic obscenity in terms of the necessary conditions
for the abandonment of joke-structures. Speculation about
possible audiences for such material does then introduce again
the real and symbolic 'profits' which such obscene humour may
produce, and the risks of investing obscene cultural capital.
- 468 -
38. We should note two modalities in the use of the word 'shock'.
It can be employed in a social/moral sense: "... it should
shock me ... it doesn't shock me ... (etc.)" (L16,69-70) or
"... I was shocked, I mean I shouldn't have been, I'm ideologi-
cally sound ..." (L5,93). But the word can also refer to a
visceral, more or less physiological trauma. Although in any
particular instance the two senses are likely both to be pre-
sent, in what follows we shall try to concentrate on the lat-
ter, more physically Immediate, sense.
39. Freud op. cit. (1976) pp.282-285.
40. The scores have been adjusted so that the total 'marks' awarded
by each respondent are the same. Thus where a subject (e.g.
H1) had marked two headings '1', these scores were adjusted to
the average of the scores available: (1+2)/2=11. In those few
instances where another factor for enjoyment had been included
(under 'other') in the rank order, that factor was simply
omitted and the remaining factors moved up by one point. cf.
Appendix 1 for details of questionnaire responses. In the case
of one respondent (L12) the scores have been 'inverted': it
appeared clear from the way in which the answers had been
entered that this respondent had given the highest score for
her preferred factor, scoring zero for 'visual
violence/aggression'.
41. Wilson, op. cit. pg.153. cf. also pg.170 above.
42. ibid. pg.99. cf. also pg.195 above.
43. One respondent, H13, did pose the question (in answering
questionnaire item 36) of why the sexual and excremental had
been put together in one factor.
44. cf. Nowlis op. cit. (1966) and V. Nowlis and R. Green op. cit.;
also pp.182-185 above.
45. Nowlis and Green op. cit. (1957) pg.360.
46. The distinction between the 'social audience' and the
individuated spectator is an important one which has often been
elided in recent (theoretical) work. Writing more specifically
of TV soap opera and film melodrama, Annette Kuhn points out
that "... the assumption is usually that such popularity has to
do mainly with the social audience ... But when the nature of
the appeal is sought in the texts themselves or in relations
between spectators and texts, the argument becomes rather more
complex." ('Women's Genres: Melodrama, Soap Opera and Theory'
in Screen vol.25 no.1 (1984) pg.26)
47. Some of the responses by this respondent furnish salutary
evidence of the kinds of factors that can muddy the waters of
this kind of research. Four apparently perplexing adjective
shifts for H13 were 'forgiving' (+3), 'sorry' (+3), 'sarcastic'
(-3) and 'annoyed' (-3). It transpired, after the recorded
discussion had been completed, that this respondent, who is an
ex-colleague of mine, had been 'hurt' because of the way in
which he had been asked to participate in the research; I had,
in the event, contacted him at relatively short notice after
another respondent had been obliged to drop out: he felt,
therefore, that I had used him as a 'reserve'. It is, of
course, impossible to say to what extent other shifts recorded
by this respondent may have been affected by this 'extrinsic'
factor.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ANON., Histoires de Tres Mauvais Gout (Solar ed. Paris 1984)
P.ACKROYD, review of Monty Python's Life of Brian in the Spectator,
17.11.79
L.ALTHUSSER, Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays (New Left Books,
London 1977)
P.ARIES, L'Enfant et la Vie Familiale, (Librairie Plon 1960)
St.AUGUSTINE, De Magistro I: De Locutionis Significatione.
M.BAKHTIN, Rabelais and his World (MIT, Cambridge Mass 1968)
H.BARRY, 'The Role of Subject-matter in Individual Preferences in
Humour', in Journal of Genetic Psychology vol.35
(1928)
R.BARTHES, S/Z (Seuil, Paris 1970)
R.BARTHES, Sade, Fourier, Loyola (Seuil, Paris 1971)
J-L.BAUDRY, 'The Apparatus', in Camera Obscura no.1 (1976)
BBC, Audience Research Unit, Communication: A Case Study of Days of
Hope, in Annual Review of BBC Audience Research
Findings, no.4 1976/77 (BBC 1978)
S.BELL, cartoons in The Guardian, ca. 1985
T.BENNETT, A Thousand And One Troubles: Blackpool Pleasure Beach,
in Formations of Pleasure (Routledge & Kegan Paul,
London 1983)
E.BENVENISTE, Problemes de Linquistique Ggne.rale (Gallimard, Paris
1966)
H.BERGSON, Le Rire (La Revue de Paris 1900)
Laughter (transl. Brereton & Rothwell) (MacMillan &
Co., London 1935)
E.BERILLON, La Psychologie de L'Olfaction: La Fascination Olfactive
Chez lee Animaux et Chez L'Homme, in La Revue de 
L'Hypnotisme, Oct. 1908
D.E.BERLYNE, Laughter, Humour and Play, in Lindzey & Aronson (eds.)
Handbook of Social Psychology (Addison-Wesley,
Reading, Mass., 1968)
G.S.BLUM, The Blacky Pictures: A Technique for the Exploration of 
Personality Dynamics (New York Psychological Corp.
1950)
P.BONAFFE, Objet Magique, Sorcellerie et Ftichisme, in Nouvelle 
Revue de Psychanalyse no.2 (1970)
D.BORDWELL, Narrative in the Fiction Film (Methuen 1985)
R.BOSTON, The Anatomy of Laughter (Collins 1974)
R.BOSTON, in The Guardian 9.4.87
P.BOURDIEU, Aristocracy of Culture, in Media, Culture and Society
(1980(2))
P.BOURDIEU, Ce Que Parler Veut Dire (Fayard, Paris 1982)
P.BOURDIEU, Distinction: A Critique of the Judgement of Taste
(transl. R.Nice) (Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Mass., 1984)
J.BOURKE, Scatologic Rites of All Nations (Lowdermilk & Co.,
Washington 1891)
A.BRIEN, review of Monty Python's Life of Brian, in The Sunday Times
18.11.79
N.O.BROWN, Life Against Death (Routledge & Kegan Paul, London 1959)
P.BRUCKNER & A.FINKIELKRAUT, Le Nouveau D6sordre Amoureux 
(Seuil/Points, Paris 1977)
D.BUCKINGHAM, Children and Television: An Overview of the Research
(British Film Institute Summer School Paper 1987)
- 471 -
S.BURNISTON & C.WEEDON, Ideology, Subjectivity and the Artistic
Text, in Working Papers in Cultural Studies no.10
(CCCS Birmingham)
, D.BYRNE, The Relation Between Humour and the Expression of
Hostility, in Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology vol.53 (1956)
D.BYRNE, The Repression-Sensitisation Scale: Rationale, Reliability
and Validity, in Journal of Personality vol.29 (1961)
D.BYRNE, Some Inconsistencies in the Effect of Motivation Arousal on
Humour Preferences, in Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology vol.62 (1961)
A.CABANES, Moeurs Intimes du Passe (Paris 1908)
M.CAMPIONI & L.GROSS, Little Hans: The Production of Oedipus, in
P.Foss & M.Morris (eds.), Language, Sexuality and
Subversion (Feral pubs, Darlington Australia 1978)
J-C.CARRIERE, Humour 1900 (eds. 'J'ai lu s , Paris 1963)
F.CASETTI, Looking for the Spectator, in Iris, vol.1 no.2 (1983)
R.B.CATTELL & I.H.SCHEIER, The Meaning and the Measurement of 
Neuroticism and Anxiety (Ronald, New York 1961)
G.CHAPMAN, interviews in Gay News no.4 (1972) and no.201 (1980)
CHAPMAN & FOOT (eds.), Humour and Laughter: Theory, Research and
Applications (Wiley, London 1976)
CHAPMAN & FOOT (eds), International Conference of Humour and
Laughter (1977)
M.CHARNEY, Comedy High and Low (Open University Publications 1978)
N.CLAREE & P.EVANS, London for Beginners (Writers and Readers,
London 1984)
J.COLEMAN, in New Statesman 17.7.81
R.COLLINS & V.PORTER, WDR and Arbeiterfilm: Fassbinder, Ziewer and
Others (BFI, 1981)
E.de BONNOT CONDILLAC, Traits des Sensations (1754)
I.CONNELL & R.PATERSON, The Politics of Viewing (Compilation paper
for British Institute Summer School 1981)
A.CORBIN, The Foul and the Fragrant (Berg Pubs. 1986) (originally Le
Miasme et la Jonquille (eds. Aubier Montaigne 1982))
W.CORMACK, The TV Audience: Seen but Not Heard, in Stills Sept./Oct.
R.L.COSER, Laughter Among Colleagues, in Psychiatry vol.23 (1960)
R.COWARD & J.ELLIS, Language and Materialism (Routledge & Regan
Paul, London 1977)
CURJEL, Holzschnitte des Hans Baldung Grien (1924)
G.F.CUSTEN, Fiction as Truth: Viewer Use of Data About the 'Real' 
World (Summary article based on unpublished thesis,
1986)
W.DAVIS, review of Monty Python in The Daily Telegraph 21.6.74
G.DELEUZE & R.GUATTARI, Anti-Oedipus (University of Minnesota Press
1983)
F.DOLTO, Fragrances, in Sorcieres no.5
J.DORIS & E.FIERMAN, Humour and Anxiety, in Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology vol.53 (1956)
M.DOUGLAS, Purity and Danger (Routledge & Regan Paul, London 1966)
H.D.DUNCAN, Communication and Social Order (Bedminster Press, New
York 1962)
R.DURGNAT, in Films and Filming (April 1964)
A.DWORKIN, Intercourse (Arrow Books, London 1988)
E.DWORKIN & J.EFRAN, The Angered: Their Susceptibility to Varieties
of Humour, in Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology vol.6 (1967)
R.DYER, Stars (BFI 1982)
R.DYER, Heavenly Bodies: Film Stars and Society (BFI/MacMillan 1987)
T.EAGLETON, Walter Beniamin, or Towards a Revolutionary Criticism
(New Left Books, London 1981)
T.EAGLETON, Poetry, Pleasure and Politics, in Formations of Pleasure 
(Routledge & Kegan Paul, London 1983)
T.EAGLETON, Capitalism, Modernism and Postmodernism, in New Left 
Review no.152 (July/Aug. 1985)
M.EASTMAN, En-joyment of Laughter (Hamish Hamilton 1937)
M.EATON, Anthropology - Reality - Cinema (BFI 1979)
M.EATON, postscript to S.Neale, Psychoanalysis and Comedy, in Screen
vol.22 no.2 (1981)
M.EATON, Laughter in the Dark, in Screen vol.22 no.2 (1981)
C.ECKERT, Shirley Temple and the House of Rockefeller, in Jump Cut 
no.2 (July/Aug. 1972)
M.ELIADE, Le Mythe de L'Eternel Retour (nrf Gallimard, Paris 1949)
N.ELIAS, The Civilising Process (Basil Blackwell, Oxford 1978)
J.ELLIS, Made in Ealing, in Screen vol.16 no.1 (Spring 1975)
J.EMERSON, Negotiating the Serious Import of Humour, in Sociometry
vol.32 (1969)
C.ENZENSBERGER, Smut: An Anatomy of Dirt (Calder & Boyars, London
1972)
EPSTEIN & SMITH, Repression and Insight as Related to Reaction to
Cartoons, in Journal of Consulting Psychology vol.20
(1956)
ERASMUS, De Civilitate Morum Puerilium (1530)
S.ERTEL, Eine psychologische Theorie des Komischen (Habilitations
Vortrag, University of Munster 1968)
S.FERENCZI, Sex in Psychoanalysis (transl. E.Jones) (Hogarth, London
1950)
S.FERENCZI, Final Contributions to the Problems and Methods of 
Psychoanalysis (Hogarth, London 1955)
FILM COMMENT, (Nov./Dec. 1981) interview with Terry Gilliam
S.FISH, Is there a Text in the Class? The Authority of Interpretive
Communities (Harvard University Press, Cambridge
Mass., 1980)
E.B.FRANKEL, An Experimental Study of Psychoanalytic Theories of 
Humour (unpublished Ph.D thesis, University of
Michigan 1953)
S.FREUD, introduction to J.Bourke, Scatologic Rites of All Nations 
S.FREUD, Collected Papers (eds. J.Riviere & J. Strachey) (Inter-
national Psychoanalytic Press, London 1924-1950)
S.FREUD, The Interpretation of Dreams (Pelican Freud Library 1976)
S.FREUD, Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious (Pelican Freud
Library 1976)
E.FROMM, Escape from Freedom (Rhinehart, New York 1941)
J.FROW, Accounting for Tastes: Some Problems in Bourdieu's Sociology
of Culture, in Cultural Studies vol.1 no.1 (Jan. 1987)
F.FURNIVALL, The Babees Book (1908 edition 'translated' by
E.Rickert)
E.GELLNER, Legitimation of Belief (Cambridge University Press 1974)
P.GILLIATT, review of Monty Python and the Holy Grail, in New Yorker
5.5.75
- 473 -
M.GODKEWITCH, Verbal, Exploratory and Physiological Responses to
Stimulus Properties Underlying Humour (unpublished
Ph.D thesis, University of Toronto 1974)
GOLDSTEIN & McGHEE, (eds.) The Psychology of Humour (Academic Press,
New York & London 1972)
H.GOLLOB & H.LEVINE, Distraction as a Favour in the Enjoyment of
Aggressive Humour, in Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology vol.5 (1967)
S.GOODLAD, The Social Significance of Television Comedy, in
C.W.E.Bigsby (ed.), Approaches to Popular Culture
(Arnold 1976)
F. GRAHAM, The Geordie Netty (Newcastle-upon-Tyne 1977)
A.GRAY, Reading the Audience, in Screen vol.28 no.3 (Summer 1987)
GRIZWOK & SCODEL, Some Psychological Correlates of Humour
Preferences, in Journal of Consulting Psychology
vol.20 (1956)
M.GROTJAHN, Beyond Laughter (McGraw-Hill 1957; paperback 1966)
GUARDIAN article on Terry Gilliam (Tinkling Symbols) 6.4.77
GUARDIAN report 27.1.88
J.GUTMAN & R.PRIEST, When is Aggression Funny?, in Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology vol.12 (1969)
C.HALL & G.LINDZEY, Theories of Personality (John Wiley & sons 1978)
S.HALL, Culture, the Media, and the Ideological Effect, in Curran,
Gurevitch & Woollacott (eds.), Mass Communications and
Society (Arnold London 1977)
S.HALL, Encoding and Decoding in the Television Discourse
(occasional paper, CCCS Birmingham 1973)
S.HALL, D.HOBSON, A.LOWE & P.WILLIS (eds.), Culture, Media, Language
(Hutchinson, London 1980)
J.HALLORAN (ed.), The Effects of Television (Panther, London 1970)
J.HARINGTON (Sir), The Metamorphosis of Alax (originally published
1596; refs. are to 1814 edition)
S.HARVEY, May '68 and Film Culture (BFI 1978)
F.HATIN, Essai Medico-philosophigue sur les Mavens d'Amgliorer
l'Etat Sanitaire de la Classe Indigente (1832)
J.HAWKESWOTH, An Account of the Voyages Undertaken ... vol.II (1773)
B.HENDERSON, Romantic Comedy Today, in Film Quarterly (Summer 1978)
R.HEWISON, Monty Python: The Case Against (Eyre Methuen, London
1981)
B.HILLIER, in Sunday Telegraph Supplement 24.10.78
P.Q.HIRST, Althusser and the Theory of Ideology, in Economy and
Society vol.5 no.4 (Nov. 1976)
P.Q.HIRST, Problems and Advances in the Theory of Ideology, in
Opening Session of the First Communist University of 
Cambridge (1976)
G.HOCQUENGHEM, Homosexual Desire (Allison & Busby, London 1978)
R.HODGE & D.TRIPP, Children and Television (Polity Press 1986)
N.HOLLAND, The Dynamics of Literary Response (Oxford University
Press, New York 1968)
R. JACKSON, Fantasy, the Literature of Subversion (Methuen, London &
New York 1981)
W.JAMES, The Principles of Psychology vol.1 (Henry Holt, New York
1890)
F.JAMESON, Pleasure: A Political Issue, in Formations of Pleasure
(Routledge & Kegan Paul, London 1983)
C.JOHNSTON & P.WILLEMEN, Brecht in Britain and the Independent
Political Film, in Screen vol.16 no.4 (1975)
- 474 -
P.KEITH-SPIEGEL, Early Conceptions of Humour: Varieties and Issues,
in Goldstein & McGhee (eds.), The Psychology of Humour
(Academic Press, New York & London 1972)
D.I.KENNY, The Contingency of Humour Appreciation on the Stimulus-
confirmation of Joke-ending Expectations, in Journal 
of Abnormal and Social Psychology vol.51 (1955)
0.KLAPP, The Fool as a Social Type, in American Journal of 
Psychology vol.45 (Sept. 1948)
M.KLEIN, The Psychoanalysis of Children (transl. A.Strachey)
(International Psychoanalytic Library no.22) (Hogarth
Press, London 1954)
M.KLEIN, Some Reflections on the Oresteia, in Our Adult World and
Other Essays (William Heinemann medical books, London
1963)
A.KOESTLER, Act of Creation (Hutchinson, London 1964)
M.KOHLI, B.DIPPELHOFER-STIEM & B.POMMERENE, Workers Watch Workers'
Films, in Leviathan vol.4 no.3 (1976) (transl.
S.Johnston)
A.KROKER & D.COOK, The Postmodern Scene: Excremental Culture and
Hyper-asethetics (MacMillan 1988)
A.KUHN, Women's Genres: Melodrama, Soap Opera and Theory, in Screen
vol.25 no.1 (1984)
M.KUNDERA, L'Insoutenable Legarete de L'Etre (nrf Gallimard, Paris
1984)
J.LACAN, Seminaire I (Seuil, Paris 1975)
J.LACAN, Ecrits (selection transl. A.Sheridan) (Tavistock, London
1977)
LA FAVE, Superiority, Enhanced Self-esteem and Perceived-incongruity
Humour theory, in Chapman & Foot (eds.), Humour and
Laughter: Theory, Research and Applications (Wiley,
London 1976)
G.LAKOFF, interview with H.Parrett, University of California mimeo
(Oct. 1973)
D.LAPORTE, Histoire de la Merde (Premiere Livraison, Paris 1978)
LASALLE, Les Reqles de la Bienseance et de la Civilite Chretienne
(1729 and 1774)
P.LAUTER (ed.) Theories of Comedy (Anchor Doubleday & Co., New York
1964)
G.LEGMAN, Love and Death (Breaking Point, New York 1949)
G.LEGMAN, Rationale of the Dirty Joke (Grove Press 1968)
G.LEGMAN, La Psychanalyse de L'Humour Erotigue (French version)
(Robert Laf font, Paris 1971)
G.LEGMAN & B.KEITH, King Turd (transl. of Ubu Roi) (1953)
A.LEMAIRE, Jacques Lacan (Routledge & Kegan Paul, London 1977)
P.LEROUX, De L'Humanite, de son Principe, et de son Avenir, oa se
trouve Expose la Vraie Definition de la Religion et 
oa on Explique le Sens, la Suite et L'Enchatnement du
Mosalsme et du Christianisme (Paris 1840)
P.LEROUX, Aux Etats de Jersey (1853)
G.LINDZEY, Thematic Apperception Test: Interpretive Assumptions and
Related Empirical Evidence, in Psychological Bulletin
vol.49 (1952)
T.LOVELL, Pictures of Reality: Aesthetics, Politics and Pleasure 
(BFI 1980)
J-F.LYOTARD, Economie Libidinale (Minuit, Paris 1975)
E.MANDEL, Introduction to Marxist Economic Theory (Pathfinder Press,
New York 1979)
- 475 -
R.C.MANNELL, Social In-justice, Retaliatory Equity and Vicarious 
Superiority Humour (paper presented at International
Conference of Humour and Laughter, Cardiff 1976)
M.MARIE, in Lectures du Film (eds. Albatros, Paris 1975)
G.MAST, The Comic Mind (Bobbs-Merrill, Indianapolis 1973)
C.McCABE, Realism and Cinema: Notes on some Brechtian Theses, in
Screen vol.15 no.2 (1974)
C.McCABE, The Politics of Separation, in Screen vol.16 no.4 (1975)
C.McCABE, Principles of Realism and Pleasure, in Screen vol.17 no.3
(1976)
C.McCABE, Those Golden Years, in Marxism Today (April 1988)
D.M.McNAIR & M.LORR, An Analysis of Mood in Neurotics, in Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology vol.69 (1964)
D.McQUAIL (ed.), Socioloqy of Mass communications (Penguin 1979)
W.M.MERCHANT, Comedy (Critical Idiom Series) (Methuen, London 1972)
L-S.MERCIER, Tableau de Paris (1782-1788) vol.2
G.MEREDITH, An Essay on Comedy (1897)
C.METZ, The Imaginary Signifier, in Screen vol.16 no.2 (1975)
E.MIDWINTER, Make 'em Laugh: Famous Comedians and their Worlds 
(Allen & Unwin, London 1979)
MONTY PYTHON: Monty Python and the Holy Grail (Book) (Eyre Methuen
1977)
Animations of Mortality (Eyre Methuen 1978)
Monty Python's The Meaning of Life (Methuen London
1983)
C.D.MORGAN & H.A.MURRAY, A Method for Investigating Fantasies: The
Thematic Apperception Test, in Archive of Neurolocm
and Psychiatry vol.34 (1935)
D.MORLEY, The Nationwide Audience (BFI 1980)
D.MORLEY, Texts, Readers, Subjects, in S.Hall, D.Hobson, A.Lowe &
P.Willis (eds.), Culture, Media, Language (Hutchinson,
London 1980)
D.MORLEY, The Nationwide Audience: A Critical Postscript, in Screen
Education (no.39, Summer 1981)
D.MORLEY, Family Television: Cultural Power and Domestic Leisure
(Comedia, London 1986)
L.MULVEY, Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema, in Screen vol.16
no.3 (1975)
L.MULVEY & P.WOLLEN, Written Discussion, in Afterimage no.6
A.MURPHY, in Heavy Stuff (Class War 'theoretical' journal) no.1
(Dec. 1987)
H.A.MURRAY, Explorations in Personality (Oxford Press, New York
1938)
H.A.MURRAY, Thematic Apperception Test Manual (Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1943)
D.NATHAN, The Lauqhtermakers: A Quest for Comedy (Owen, London 1971)
S.NEALE, Psychoanalysis and Comedy, in Screen vol.22 no.2 (1981)
G.NERHARDT, Humour and Inclination to Laugh: Emotional Reaction to
Stimuli of Different Divergence from Range of
Expectancy, in Scandinavian Journal of Psychology
vol.11 (1970)
NEW SOCIALIST, review of Full Metal Jacket (Oct. 1987)
H.NICOLSON, The English Sense of Humour and Other Essays (Constable
& Co., London 1956)
G.NOWELL-SMITH, In a State, in Screen Education no.30
V.NOWLIS, Research with the Mood Adjective Check-list, in Tomkins &
Izard (eds.), Affect Cognition and Personality
(Tavistock 1966)
V.NOWLIS & R.GREEN, The Experimental Analysis of Mood (Technical
Report no.3, office of Naval Research, contr. no.
Nonr.668(12) (1957)
W.O'CONNELL, The Adaptive Function of Wit and Humour, in Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology vol.61 (1960)
M.ORNE, On the Social Psychology of the Psychological Experiment,
in American Psychologist vol.17 (1962)
J.PALMER, The Logic of the Absurd (BFI, London 1987)
J.PALMER, Comedy (Martin Secker, London 1914)
C.PENLEY, The Avant-garde and its Imaginary, in Camera Obscura no.2
R.E.PERL, Influence of a Social Factor Upon Appreciation of Humour,
in American Journal of Psychology vol.45 (1933)
A.H.PIERCE, The Subconscious Again, in Journal of Philosophy, 
Psychology and Scientific Method vol.5 (1908)
POSITIF, interviews with/articles on Terry Gilliam (no.289 March
1985)
A.R.RADCLIFFE-BROWN, On Joking Relationships, in Africa vol.13
(1940)
J.RADWAY, Reading the Romance (University of North Carolina Press
1984)
A.RODWAY, English Comedy (Chatto & Windus, London 1975)
ROLLING STONE, interview/article 13.11.80
K.E.ROSENGREN & S.WINDAHL, Mass Media Consumption as a Functional
Alternative, in D.McQuail (ed.), Sociology of Mass
Communications (Penguin 1979)
G.C.ROSENWALD, The Relation of Drive Discharge to the Enjoyment of
Humour, in Journal of Personality vol.32 (1964)
R.R.SEARS, Survey of Objective Studies of Psychoanalytic Concepts 
(Social Science Research Council, New York 1942)
J-P.SIMON, Le Filmique et le Comique (eds. Albatros, Paris 1979)
D.SINGER, Aggression Arousal, Hostile Humour, Catharsis, in Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology (Monograph
Supplement) (Jan. 1968)
SINGER, GOLLOB & LEVINE, Mobilisation of Inhibition and Enjoyment of
Aggressive Humour, in Journal of Personality vol.35
(1967)
J.SKYNNER & J.CLEESE, Families and How to Survive Them (Methuen,
London 1984)
T.SMOLLETT, Humphry Clinker (Penguin 1982)
SPIEGEL, BRODKIN & KEITH-SPIEGEL, Unacceptable Impulses, Anxiety and
the Appreciation of Cartoons, in Journal of Projective
Techniques and Personality Assessment vol.33 (1969)
M.STEIG, Defining the Grotesque: An Attempt at Synthesis, in Journal
of Aesthetics and Art Criticism vol.29 (1970)
R.STEPHENSON, Conflict and Control Functions in Humour, in American
Journal of Sociology vol.56 (May 1951)
G.STRACHAN, 10 Years of Silly Publishing, in The Bookseller 10.10.81
G.STRICKER, The Construction and Partial Validation of an
Objectively Scorable Apperception Test, in Journal of 
Personality vol.30 (1962)
J.STRICKLAND, The Effect of Motivation Arousal on Humour Preference,
in Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology vol.59
(1958)
- 477 -
S.SULEIMAN & I.CROSSMAN (eds.), The Reader in the Text (Princeton
University Press 1980)
P.SUSKIND, Perfume (Penguin 1986)
W.SYPHER, Comedy (Doubleday & Anchor, New York 1956)
T.SZASZ, Ideology and Insanity (Pelican 1970)
K.THEWELEIT, Male Fantasies (Polity Press, Cambridge 1987)
(originally Mannerphantasien (Verlag Roter Stern 1977)
J.O.THOMPSON, Monty Python, Complete and Utter Theory of the
Grotesque (BFI 1982)
P.THOMSON, The Grotesque (Associated Book Publications 1972)
S.TOMKINS, The Thematic Apperception Test (Grune & Stratton, New
York 1947)
J.TOMPKINS, Reader Response Criticism: From Formalism to
Poststructuralism (John Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore 1980)
J.UDRIS, I'm All Right Jack: The Politics of Comedy (dissertation
for MA Degree, Polytechnic of Central London 1982)
J.von USSEL, L'Histoire de la Repression Sexuelle (Laffont, Paris
1966)
J.WALKER, in Sunday Express Magazine 12.7.81
V.WALKERDINE, Video Replay: Families, Film and Fantasy, in V.Burgin,
J.Donald & C.Kaplan (eds.), Formations of Fantasy
(Methuen, London/New York 1986)
M.WATTS, review in The Times 16.8.81
S.WEBER, The Divaricator: Remarks on Freud's Witz, in Glyph no.1
(1977)
E.WELSFORD, The Fool: His Social and Literary History (Faber &
Faber, London 1935)
P.WILLEMEN, Voyeurism, The Look and Dwoskin, in Afterimage no.6
(Summer 1976)
J.WILLIAMSON, Webfooted Friends, in New Statesman 22.4.88
R.WILMUT, From Fringe to Flying Circus (Methuen, London 1982)
C.WILSON, Jokes: Form, Content, Use and Function (Academic Press
1979)
WOLFF, SMITH & MURRAY, The Psychology of Humour I: A Study of
Responses to Race-disparagement Jokes, in Journal of 
Abnormal and Social Psychology vol.28 (1934)
R.WOOD, The American Family Comedy, in Wide Angle vol.3 no.2 (1979)
R.YOUNG & M.FRYE, Some Are Laughing, Some Are Not - Why?, in
Psychological Reports vol.18 (1966)
ZILLMAN & CANTOR, Resentment Towards Victimised Protagonists and
Severity of Misfortunes They Suffer as Factors in
Humour Appreciation, in Journal of Experimental 
Research in Personality vol.6 (1973)
M.ZUCKERMAN, The Development of an Affect Adjective Checklist for
the Measuring of Anxiety, in Journal of Counselling
Psychology vol.24 (1960)
Grotesque and Excremental Humour:
Monty Python's Meaning of Life.
Volume III of 3 Volumes
Janis Udris M.Sc M.A
Submitted for the degree of Ph.D
University of Warwick
Department of Film Studies
December 1988
Appendix 1 Questionnaire
2 Humour Appreciation Test
3 Mood Adjective Checklist
4 Transcript of taped discussions
Appendix 1 Comedy Questionnaire
This questionnaire was sent to all those who
expressed interest in taking part in the audience
research project.
Comedy Questionnaire 
Please complete this questionnaire as accurately as
possible, but feel free to omit questions if you cannot/prefer
not to answer them; feel free also to comment/amplify on your
responses.
The questionnaires are numbered in order to facilitate
crossreferencing; please accept that anonymity will be observed
as far as possible.
You participation in this study is much appreciated.
When you have completed the questionnaire, please return it to
Jan Udris
3, Westview Rise
Hemel Hempstead
Herts
1. Please imdloate your gender:
female
2. Please indicate your agegroup:
19 or under
20-29
30-39
40-49
50 and over
3. Please indicate your marital status:
single
married
previously married
4. Please indicate your sexual orientation:
heterosexual
homosexual
bisexual
prefer not to specify
5. Are you
British by Birth
British by naturalisation
of other nationality (please
specify)
use whatever term(s) you prefer)
7. If you are British, would you describe yourself as
English
Scottish
Welsh
(Northern) Irish
other (please specify)
8. Is English your 'first' language?
9. If you speak other languages, please specify and indicate
degree of familiarity:
10. Please indicate the level of formal education you have
completed:
primary
secondary (secondary modern)
"	 tt	 (comprehensive
n n	 (grammarschool)
(independent/public school)
college of further/higher ecucation
polytechnic
university  first degree level
  other degrees
other (please specify)
11. Please indicate the number of years' formal fulltime study
you have been engaged in since leaving school:
no. of years:
12. Are you currently pursuing any formal course of (full or part
time) study? If yes, please indicate its nature.
13. Please indicate the nature of your parents' main occupation(s)
14. Please indicate your preferred leisure activities, including
any 'hobbies':
15. Are you currently in employment?
fulltime
parttime
other (please comment)
16. Please indicate the nature of your work. If currently not
employed, please indicate nature of previous work and/or
area in which you would be seeking employment.
17. How much time would you estimate that you spend readingin an
average week  for pleasure and for personal fulfilment?
under 2 hours
2-5 hrs
6-10 hrs
11-15 hrs
16-20 hrs
21-25 hrs
over 25 hours
18. Do you have (or have daily access to) a television?
19. Do you have (or have daily access to) a video recorder?
20. How much TV would you estimate that you watch each day (on
average):	 virtually none
under 1 hour
1-2 hrs
2-3 hrs
3-4 hrs
4-6 hrs
6-8 hrs
over 8 hours
21. How much TV would you estimate that you watch in one week
(on average):	 virtually none
under 5 hours
5-10 hrs
11-20 hrs
21-30 hrs
31-50 hrs
over 50 hours
22. Do you more often give TV your undivided attention (even if
you are with someone else), or do you tend to use TVwatching
as a social activity?
Isclitary'/concentratint approach
social use
comments
23. How often do you normally go to the cinema (including film
societies):
rarely
about once a week
about twice a week
about three times a week
four or five times a week
more often (please specify)
24. For every 10 films you see, please estimate how many you would
be likely to see in each of the following ways/places:
on rented video
on TV as broadcast
video of TVbroadcast film
at National or Regional film theatre
at other film club/society
local arts centre
other/comments
25. How many films (films originally made for cinema distribution)
would you estimate that you see each week, either on TV, at a
cinema, or elsewhere:
practically none
one or two
3 or 4
5 or 6
11-14
15 or over
26. Please indicate how regular your filmviewin g Patterns are.
Do you go to the cinema regularly? with the same friends? Do
your working patterns make filmviewing difficult? Please
comment.
27. How often do you see films for a second (or 3rd etc) time?
never
rarely
sometimes
often
28. Do you usually find that a film is more enjoyable/rewarding
on repeated viewing than first time round?
Please commant on your answer.
29. Please list your 'favourite three films of all time'(:) and
indicate how many times you have seen each one:
30. Over a number of films you go to see at the cinema (the last
ten, say), how important would the following factors be in
your choice of film? Indicate on how many of the 10 (or 20?)
occasions each factor would have played a part.(You can count
more than one factor for each film)
principal actor(s)
director
cinema/location
favourable review/criticism
wordofmouth recommendation
type of film/story/plot
expected emotional/psychological
effect (eg. comedy, melodrama)
who you're going with
other (please comment)
31. Please specify which newspapers you read most regularly:
Which other newspaper(s) do you also look at (and how frequently)?
32. Please indicate any cartoonists (newspaper or otherwise) whose
material you like/look at regularly:
33, Which of the following TV'comedy' programmes have you watched
with any regularity? Please indicate how often you watched
each (whole series, often, occasionally). Leave out those you
haven't seen,
The Young Ones
Alas Smith and Jones
The Two Ronnies
Girls on Top
Who Dares...
Bless This House
Not The Nine O'clock News
Naked Video
Benny Hill Show
Kenny Everett
Filthy Rich & Catflap
Duty Free
Perfect Strangers
34. How does the list you have filled in for Q33 correspond to
your TV comedy preferences? riease comment.
35. Would you describe yourself as a 'Monty Python' fan?
no, definitely not
no strong opinion
36. If you have just ticked 'yes', please indicate which elements
of Monty Python humour contribite most to your appreciation.
(number in order of importance). If you dislike Monty Python
humour, please ifldicate which of the elements you find most
objectionable or least pleasurable.
irreverence
sexual/excremental content
the animation
visual violence/aggression
absurdity/nonsense
performance /acting
other (please specify/comment)
37. Did you see some of the 'Monty Python's Flying Circus' series
when it was first shown on TV?
yes, most/all of them
one or two episodes
38. Please indicate which of the following films you have seen:
And Now for Something Completely
Different
Monty Python and the Holy Grail
Jabberwocky
Monty Python's Life of Brian
Time Bandits
The Missionary
Meaning of Life
Brazil
39. Would you say that you tell jokes
frequently
occasionally
rarely
practically never
40. Please indicate how/where you found out about this research
project.
41. Please comment briefly on what you think the purpose of this
questionnaire (and the research project overall) may be.
42. If you feel you would be able to spare about 3 hours to view
a (video) film and to take part in a taped discussion, please
indicate the dates/times which would be convenient for you:
Weds. 20th May 2.00 pm
Thurs 21st May 7.00 pm
Sat. 23rd May 2.00 pm
Tues. 26th May 7.00 pm
Weds. 27th May 7.00 pm
Thurs 28th May 2.00 pm
Sat. 30th May 2.00 pm
Again, thank you for your helps
Jan Udris
Appendix 2 Humour Appreciation Test (HAT)
Administered to respondents who viewed Monty
Python's Meaning of Life as part of the audience
research project.
not funny
at all
moder-
ately
funny
extremely
funny
not funny
at all
moder-
ately
funny
extremely
funny
not funny
at all
moder-
ately
funny
extremely
funny
Humour Ratings Sheet for 'The Meaning of Life'
You will be watching 'The Meaning of Life', and the film
will be (briefly) interrupted at 5 points. Please indicate how
funny you have found each section of the film, on the sevenpoint
scale below. For example, if you found a particular section more
than moderately funny but not in the extremely funny category,
you would tick box number 5 or 6. There will be a 10-20 second
break between each section for you to make your choice.
Zeation 1. 'Crimson PermAnInt IsAurance,
1	 2	 3	 4	 5	 6	 7
not funny
moder	 extremely
at all
ately	 funny
funny
le&tion	 t Mirjacle_of BirthiLlGrowth_and_Learnine
1	 2	 3	 4	 5	 6	 7
eatioa ..yjghting Each_Other'
2	 3	 4
5	 6	 7
le etion A lAiddle of_the_Film ' Z ' Middle_ALe'PLive Oran
1	 2	 3	 4	 6
	 plants'
Aeation 1 'The Autumn YeAral
1	 2	 3	 4
5	 6	 7
not funny
	 moder-	 extremely
at all
ately	 funny
funny
Aeation 6 'The M1aning of  Life'L'Death'L'The End of the Film'
1	 2	 3	 4	 5	 6	 7
not funny	 moder	 extremely
at all	 ately	 funny
funny
Appendix 3 Mood Adjective Check List (MACL)
Administered to respondents immediately before and
after viewing Monty Python's Meaning of Life.
MOOD ADJECTIVE CHECKLIST
Each of the following words describes a feeling or a mood.
Please use the list to describe your feelings at the  moment that
you read each word. If the word definitely describes how you feel
at the moment you read it, circle " to the right of the word.
For example, if the word is 'thirsty' and you are definitely
feeling thirsty at the moment, circle the " as follows:
thirsty
no	 (definitely feel thirsty now)
If the word only slightly applies to how you feel at the moment,
circle the single " as follows:
thirsty I,/ c2 ? no	 (you feel slightly thirsty now)
If the word is not clear to you or you cannot decide if it applies
to your feelings at the moment, circle the questionmark:
thirsty ././ ./ 0 no (you can't decide whether you
feel thirsty or not)
If you decide the word definitely does not apply to how you feel
at the moment, circle the 'no':
thirsty ../.? VP
(definitely not thirsty now)
WORK RAPIDLY. YOUR FIRST REACTION IS BEST, WORK DOWN THE FIRST
COLUMN, THEN THE SECOND. PLEASE MARK ALL WORDS. THIS SHOULD
TAKE ONLY A FEW MINUTES.
PLEASE BEGIN.
accommodating %/V V ?
active
afraid
alert
angry
annoyed
apprehensive
attentive
belligerent
bored
carefree
careful
cheerful
clearthinking Vve	 ?
concentrating ,/,/ ,/e ?
confident	 V./ VP?
A/ V Q
V V V ? no
%/V N,/ ? no
,/ 9 no
Vi/ V ?
.4/	 ?
n4/ ./
VPv / ?
j/ v. 9 no
V./ VP 9 no
/ 9 no
v-v v 9 no
no	 contemplative// V. 9
no	 detached	 4/	 ?
delighted	 ././	 ?
depressed	 V./	 ?
desperate	 V.7	 ?
no	 disinterested .././ Ye I
no	 dissatisfied I/ V ?
earnest	 n/./
%/.7efficient	 V 9
?egotistic	 ./,/
no	 elated	 ././ V 9
no	 enthusiastic ve./ V ?
no	 fearful	 /./ V 9
doubtful
downhearted 4/ V 9
drowsy	 N/I
dull	 1/ V
fed up /1 ? no refreshed V,/ Vt no
forgiving ? no regretful V,/ Vt ? no
frightened no sad Vt ? no
frustrated 1 ? no sarcastic V1 ? no
full of pity no satisfied V/ Vt ? no
helpless no sceptical Vt ? no
hungry ,/,/ ? no secure ? no
inactive 1 ? no selfcentred Vv Vt ? no
in pain ,/ no selfcons cious t/V Vt ? no
insecure V,/ V ? no serious V,/ VP ? no
inspired V no shaky ,/ ? no
interested no shocked ./v Vt ? no
intoxicated Vt ? no slow V,/ Vt no
introspective Vt ? no smug V,/ Vt ? no
irritated VI ? no sociable vv VP ? no
jittery /,/ V ? no sorry /Vt Vt ? no
kind ? no startled V/ ? no
leisurely V./ ? no strong ,/,/ Vt ? no
lustful V ? no stubborn ? no
meticulous 11 V ? no subdued IV Vt ? no
miserable v( ? no suspicious ./ ? no
nervous ? no talkative ? no
obedient IV ? no tense ,/ ? no
on edge Vt ? no terrified ,/ ? no
optimistic V ? no thirsty Vt ? no
overjoyed V ? no tired ,/,/ ? no
panick* Vt ? no trustful Vt ? no
persuasive /V ,/ no uncertain V,/ ,/ ? no
playful
pleased
V.V V
upset
vigorous
proud V ? no warmhearted Vt ? no
quiet /,/ v ? no wideawake ,/ ? no
rebellious v/ ? no worried II Vt ? no
Appendix 4 Transcript of taped interviews/discussions which
followed screenings of Monty Python's Meaning of
Life.
tELEA2LI_I
DISCUSSION TAPE TRANSCRIPTS*
TAPE 1: 111 
Q: The plan would mormally be to...then have a discussion with
whoever's watching the tape...they're not rigid questions,
although I've got a.flaw ideas, written down..,
ffl : Well, whenever we find time, if you want to know anything...
but I can give you my...well, you can see that...
Q: Well yes, I've got that, but there are a number of questions,
I don't remember them all, about specific things...vague
questions like why do you find various parts of it funny,
some parts funnier than others...but then also, how One
relates to things like little bits of sexism, or whatever,
whether those things are actually a problem, or whether they...
(Interruption: 'luckily I never had to work for Jews')
Q: Yes, right...or racism, Yes...what's that sort of thing doing
in the film, is it disturbing, or is it actually funny, or...
(Interruption: 'One should not forget about that this is also
part of the meaning of life as well, you never
come across to achieve something, not at the
various places of knowledge which is mainly
museums, but one thing you have achieved, and
that is that is the knowledge that you never ever
should work for Jews...ha ha ha ha...oh, sorry,
you know...')
Q: And also the same thing is done in a way to the naked women
Hi: I felt a bit...I didn't feel really...they could have chosen
another ...but because it said, this victim could choose his
own way of dyin g , and so he could have chosen anything else,
but he chose this sexist way...
Q: Yes, but did you notice what he was convicted of...
H l : I've forgotten, something with sex, no he was convicted of...
he said he abused	 no, he used sexist words in public against
the church...
Q : Making gratuitous sexist jokes on television...in a film...
which is precisely what they're doing, in a way...
Hi: Yes, but you see...itis, of course you could have had another
idea of...this is paralleling, then...sort of being on two
levels, but you could have thought about doing it just the
opposite, you see...for ewample, him being naked, and nuns
fully dreased running after him..,but it's just, whY did
they...its just...reinforcing the joke, or making the joke
This transcript has been prepared with a view to providing
an accurate account of what was said by each respondent. No
systematic attempt has been made to record nonverbal utterances,
though some particularly clear instances of laughter etc. are
included. Pauses have been indicated by repeated stops: (...).
Also, where respondents (or interviewer) have jumbled/repeated
words in searching for an appropriate formulation, the exact
verbatim word sequence has generally not been reproduced.
visual, what he's accused of...
Q: Yes, I find myself sort of suspicious of... why bother to do
that? If one is against sexism or something then why have
something like that...what function does that sort of joke..,
if it is a joke, fulfil? so it always strikes me, my response
as well is that there are sequences like that which I 	 feel
uneasy with...
Hi: Yes, and also I felt quite uneasy with...that vomiting bit,
not with this, not in the beginning, but when he vomited onto
the cleaningwoman, that bit, I felt was a bit too much...and
this live transplantation, oh I really felt terrible with this
H/: Yes, because...oargh...well, because of his face, he was sort
of...he was feeling terrible as well, this bloke...and because
it went on and on and on, and in the end I couldn't, I just
sort of, I just don' t know whether I really laughed, all the
way through...
Q: Vo, but you were laughing a fair bit...
111: Oh, I hate, especially when he handled this organ and he cut
the, it was like a navelstring between, I don't know he cut
off another organ, probably, I don't know...because he needed
only that liver and not the rest of it...but that was terrible,
I felt...
Q: One question that I intend to... I haven't thought about
phrasing it... is like if one doesn't find it funny, why one
imagines other people would find it funny...I suppose you
could turn that question round the other way...it what ways...
Hi: This transplantation scene, for example * or the whole film...
Q: . in general...or the exploding Mr Creosote...it's all to do
with the education, the culture that one comes from, and ago,
all sorts... if I played that to my parents...they'd have a
heart attack...they wouldn't find it in the least funny
virtually all of it...I'm wondering...why?
Hi: For example what I really found funny was this...this sex
lesson, of course it is close to my own reality, probably
this is why I gave it the highest mark, because I felt, it's
impossible, because how should anyone be bored, or should any
of these pupils be bored and not pay attention when it's a
lesson on sex, and especially if it's so openly discussed and
in such, a very sort of casual, but very open and straight-
forward manner, and when that bed came down and...I could
hardly believe that they really stripped, and the contrast,
I felt very much, the contrast between this very rigid
traditional school atmosphere with the tables and the boys,
it probably was a boys' grammar school, nineteenth century
setup, and the very, in German you would say 'so schnodderig'
that you don't have, it was sort of, he threw it into their
faces, he didn't care whether there was anything perhaps
troubling them, or...he could do it in any...
Q: I always get the feeling that when you talk about it in that
way...the way you've just described it doesn't explain why you
laugh so much...
Hi: I feel that it's such a...I wouldn't have expected from what
I know that you could say something like that on television or
in a film...leave alone in a classroom...
Qs Therefore, what is it that's actually making it so funny, it's
got something to do with...taboos or shock, or...
Hi: Yes, taboos, more or less, and the extreme...one the one hand
it's the taboo, and then that ...I really sometimes...perhaps
it comes near the crudest fantasies one can have
Q: What are you talking about in particular?
Hi: That for example you have sex in the classroom in th p widest
sense... this is probably something I have in one way or the
other, I have fantasies about, and I feel seeing it acted out
in a very	 well, in such a manner that all the...excitement...
Q: Why then does te fact that you see a fantasy acted out make
it so funny...laugh so much?
Hi: Well I think first of all I felt it was a kind og..,
embarassment, that he said 'the vaginal juices' and how can
you produce them...and I felt my God...are they going to talk
about it...I was a bit embarassed...
Q: ..but also as you say it's because it's so casual, as well...
Hi: ..it's sort of as if he'd taught ge ography, or whatever...
and it is the high level of feeling that it is a taboo,
personal, and that it is handled is such a businesslike way,
that helps me to laugh about it...if it was dealt with in a
porn way, I probably would have got fidgety, or...
Q : .  .or else, if he was in a medical class, ...dealing with it
in a straight medical way...
Hi: ...probably it would have been concentrated but not laughing...
Q: It was noticeable as well that you actually laughed before
the film started...even before the credits came, before the
title of the film, that's right, at the beginning of the
Scarlet, Crimson Scarlet...Assurance, when the opening shot
came on, which was (nothing funny)
Hi: ...it was crimson:wit was something completely different:
and it was done in that fashion of the forties, like an advert.
Q: sothere was something funny...just that, yes
Hi: I felt, ah well they use another device, or 	 and I think
that was followed up by this first sketch where they iritated
this Hollywood...
ri'Q: ...but I noticed that there was a laugh as soon as that first
title, shot came up...
Hi: Yes, probably it's also because I know that it is a Monty
Python film, coming on, that I probably...
Q: You know, one og the things that's happening at the moment is
that...this is the sort of thing that's likely to happen, I'm
not sure if it should happen in interviews, is that I'm, for
instance just now, I was aware of tha fact that there was
something I wanted you to say, and I was trying to guide you
towards saying it...you were aware that it was a Monty Python
film, and therefore you were in the mood, and therefore you'd
laugh at almost anything...trying to primr you to say that...
and so if I'm doing that with groups of people...actually
encouraging them, pointing them in certain directions to say
certain things...you can point tothe interview.., and say yes,
they said this looklwit's proof:...(laughter)...
Hi: But still... I think it's true...but also because T felt...
I could have perhaps just lifted my eyebrows, or... but
probably because I knew it was cominz
Q: That was another thing that I was thinking about doing was
...too complicated to film/video peple when they 'ere watching,
if I had the money, the resources, that would be excellent...
Hi: Can't you borrow
Q: Well yes but..., you can't get close enough, I mean I'd have
to choose one person...people can move around a bit, go from
one side of a chair to another...yes, if you want to have,
say, all five people in shot, it's going to be quite a long
way away, I don't know,...lenses and things, maybe you can
sort of...but then you don't have the resolution, you can't
really see the expressions on peoples' faces...
11 1: You can, it's like with this lens...,
Q: You can either use the telephoto and the zoom lens, sorry a
wideangle elms, that's what I mean if you concentrate on one
person, and then you have to operate the lens, I'd have to
actually be there doing it...the ideal in a sense is to just
set up a camera and leave it running...
Hi: but then you can't get closer to the people...
Q: ...that's right...but that would be ideal, it would be great
to make a record of the actual facial response...
Hi: You would have to have to have two cameras, one taking all the
time the group...and one handoperated one...
Q: In which case you need other people to help you,.,thet would
be ideal to be able to look at peoples' facial expressions
and then to be able to talk about it afterwards...but that's
extremely complicated...as you say there are all sorts of
levels of response which are not...to actually then compare
the way people have marked the the sheets...
At one time I said, I can't remember when I did that...
(indicates prodding/slapping someoneelse watching)
Q: yes and that's another thing is how much people interact...
how much there's a group feeling to viewing...or whether
people are really just watching it individually",
Hi: I must say that also what played an important role for me
was that T especially enjoyed if I filly understood all.., the
verbal puns and jokes...probably this for a native speaker
wouldn't be of so much importance or delight...but I felt
that was, well I understood nearly everything...
Q: Yes, and there's one point, there's one...halfscene which I
feel doesn't work quite st well because, it's the song near
the beginning where the choir	 in the chiculth,
E l : .,.yes, I can't understand that...
that actually doesn't come out perhaps clearly enough...
maybe it just doesn't work so well, because the words are
clearly...funny...that's not quite so clear...
11 1: There are loads of...suc h a.lot of it in it...
Q: But that's what I'm interested in looking at and I'm
wondering.., it may be OK because from what you say...what
you find funniest I think, it seems, from just your reactions,
are the sexual, the irreverence, and the sexual references...
what about, the violence...
11 1 : ...yes, especially with this war scene, I found that I was
really sort of on the fence between..,that's a bit too much...
I felt...
Q: Well that wasn't...I mean I know I raised the question of
violence but I mean is that Particular scene about violence?
...it's happening in war, so to speak...
Hi: yes but, I didn't find it extremely funny, becase well first
of all I felt the setting, well the actual joke was, I felt
that in the end one after the other was killed off, was sort
of shot down and he was left alone
Q:	 find the important thing is ..the exaggeration, the
fact that, there's all this stuff about clocks, and presents
and everything...it's a kind of parody/exaggeration...
Hi: I felt it was such a simple makeup in just overdoing it and
well you knew he was the...there was shot the first one and
then the second and then you knew how it would end, so that
for me, it spoiled...I liked the thing with this big clock
being set up and then it was, this one was hit...ding: going
'ding' and...I liked that
Q: You laughed a lot when the first clock turned up as well...
111: I thought it was absolutely ridiculous...
Q: ..which is the absurd, isn't it, it's just so absurd, and
even the second one has that absurdity...but then after that,
it...I wonder, that's interesting because I mean in a way the
situation is still could you say increasingly absurd as it
goes on but actually one gets used to...
Hi: yes, you know what's going to come, I felt...after this second
clock and he produced this...(laughter) I thought well they're
allgoin g to have this...clocks or watches or whatever, and
then he came out with that cake...and then he was shot in the
meantime and I felt oh no, not really...no, he should'nt be
shot, I felt sorry, really, then...
Q: But where else would one say that there is...exaggerated
violence...the transplant scene...
111: Yell (disgust).  and with this Zulu fight, where this boy...
(laughter) well he's stabbed, well it's absolutely
unnecessary...
Q: Well no, there's a gag there, though, isn't there...the gag
is that he's stabbed, and the other bloke just takes the coat..
Hi: Well, this	 with the leg, with this...that was raw meat...
well you got used to it, at first I was shocked, I thought
l oargh t really, but then you really got used to it and then
I identified it as a sort of joint...
Q: Is there any difference between violence and kind of grotesgue
bodily things...like the raw meat of the leg or something like
that...
Hi: Yes, yes, there is, there is. I find for example that whenever
a person is stabbed like in the first scene where he sort of
gets this...not in the first scene but in this first episode,
with the Assurance Company...tak*ng over... felt when he
actually stabbed somebody.,c.this is what I find not...I don't
want to see that...but, that he sort of is...jumped out of
the window, or that he falls out, this is something where I
yes well I say oh my God...but I can laugh about it, it's
because I can't see blood actually...
Q: That's why I'm...there is a difference, then,...the leg isn't
a result of a violent act...
Hi: You get used to it
Q: But what about th4 first time you see it...how do you react
to that...
111: I thought 'my God. t but I wasn't really shocked, I said teurghl
yes, but a very...very fast reaction, it was gone in a second.
Q: And then it became part of what was funny...
Hi: Yes. What was funny about it, this absolute irrational and
grotesque...behaviour, the way they deal with..,it's so
absurd, reality, it can't be realistic, especially like the
people say after all, what, and you didn't wake up? Exactly
what I thought: how can one be so stupid...yes well...of
course, it's the British, what is it called, officers league,
or... What I find is again the exaggeration and the absirdity
its the...I think it works that normally you would have
reacted in a kind of panic way, this parson, but he was
reading the book, you see, absolutely browned off...it's
just the contrast of what is normal and this makes me laugh
and on top of that it's not only the contrast, on top of that
It is that.., they take it as their real wbrld and they
exaggerate more and more, they have their own code within
this contrast...it's perfectly all right in that way, in that
world, because he explains...for example with this virus, he
says ah, it's going to grow again, how long does it take to
grow again...and then, within this...absurdity, it's correct
to ask this, and then, the other person goes back into
reality...it seems...the reaction he shows seems as if...
you says ah well, it's absurd, to ask a question like that,
and for a moment you expect him to be real again, and explain
to him that, well, it's gone:
Q: Yes, it seems to me that there are two...I think, that seems
very interesting...uses two things: one is understatement,
which is...sitting up in bed reading a book while having your
leg (?)...the other one is exaggeration, in a sense I see that
as exaggeration, that it can be a mosquito...it's a mosquito
has bitten it off, which is a gross exaggeration of what a
mosquito can do...I find there's a combination of understate-
ment and exaggeration...
Hi: Yes, yes,...true.
Q: One of the things that...I've got in my list there that Monty
Pyjrhon are obviously...one of their sort of trademarks, was
absurdity, you know the nonsense...I suppose...what's the
distinction between nonsense and absurdity, because a lot of
things in this film are absurd, whereas the...
Hi: ...there are some nonsense...
Q: ..the television series often would be more characterised by
the nonsenseabsurd...
Hi: There was one sequence where I felt it was pure nonsense, was
when there was, there were three people, no two, he one with
the...ballet dance, the...
Q: ...they were looking: for the fish.
111:,I didn't get, I didn't understand, I thought that was Pure
nonsense, the elephant, the person with these long arms and
the other one, and I felt that was pure nonsense. I couldn't
make anything of it, I didn't understand it,
Q: And, you didn't find it...funny
HI: No, no. I think I can only...1 noticed that, that fa)* example
for me, what is ext...what really makes me laugh is, there are
little things, like when someone is...hit with a ruler
Q: ...in a Particular way
111: yes, like that. Like little boys do it, yes. It borders on
slapstick.
Q: If it was slapstick in the sense that it was little boys doing
it, iu a different, in a school context, it wouldn't be nearly
so funny...it's because it's 000 those 'old men' doing it in a
sort of mock battle situation...
El : Yes, Yes...and, what also makes me laugh, though I must really
say...it's a different laugh, for example (laughter) is this
game of rugby, where the teachers and the little boys played
against each other, and they were really sort of, oh it was
so brutal...
Q: Yes, but it made you laugh...
Yes, i t really did...
Q: Why did that make you laugh but you don't laugh at...vio/ent
things...
El : I feel there is no harm, they will get up again, these boys,
and...it's...it reminded me more of a mudbattle or whatever..,
it wasn't really...killing somebody...they might have terrible
bruises and injuries...but these, for example that he...what
is it, to pull a leg, no...the little boy wks running with
the...
Q: ...tackling...no. he tripped him up...
he's (laughter)...this unfair game, this openly unfair game,
what normally is hidden, yes, that is again totally against
the rules, but it is taken seriously from all the rest of the
Party , a gain, and...I think it is also...one of them is
obviously the one who is suffering, or there are no equal
Parties...where the boys...
Q: ...obviously, yes, so it's set up as...where there's one who
clearly is...suffering...
111: It is not, I feel it's different, I'm reminded of another
joke, of another scene, of another Monty Python film, you
remember this obstacle race...
Q:... the 'Upper Class Twit'...
111: (laughter)...this is something I really liked, thoubh it was
so...I think discriminating against handicapped people, and
this is also something...I didn't really find anything
discriminating...against...well, not this 'Jews' sentence...
nor women...OK this scene, but it was not overtly discrimin-
ating against...
Q: ...no at least it was trying to make a joke...one can argue
about whether the joke works or not, but it was actually
trying to be clever about it, it was actually trying to be
clever about making a joke about sexism...whether it works
or not is another matter...
111: and of course you could say that for example this 'All sperms
are sacred'...you could call it discriminating...
Q: Yes you could...I suppose some Roman Catholics actually might
not like it too much...
Hi: ...yes, true...for me it's...
Q: There's an example of...I was writing about this last night...
atabout this time...I was in the loft, I was in the midile of
writing something about satire...and there's a definition of..,
this guy called Max Eastman, who gives different definitions
of satire, and he says that the broadest type of satire is one
which attacks large groups of people...in a very blunt way...
and people who take offence at that really don't have much of
a sense of humour...and his example is the invention of a
'Smith rolling machine'...a machine that rolls 'Smiths', people
called Smith, so) if someone called Smith gets upset about that
thay (don't) have much of a sense of humour, because there are
so many Smiths...
Hi: But I think there are limits to...
Q: 'There are limits, aren't there'
Hi: ...n o , where I feel I can't laugh about it any more...it's
this vomiting scene onto the cleaningwoman, this is where I
feel no, that's going too far...I don't mind the waiter
step p in g into the bucket...
Q:   .or indeed simply the vomiting...vomit all over the place,
I mean again it's like the	 mmething else...I mean you were
sort of saying t eurrgh"awful t but you were laughingas well...
Hi: Yes...I felt like the other people, like this bloke who...
threw up as well (laughter) and I felt, oh yes, and...I felt
very sympathetic with that woman talking about her period...
I felt yes it's just this crazy talk that must come out in
this awful situation...ahe seemed to be completely out of her
mind...
Q: You're doing something else there, aren't you, in a sense
aren't you identifying...it's not the sort of thing that
normally happens in this sot of film...whereas in that
situation...
END OF RECORDINff.
TAPE 1: H5.117
Q: I've got a few specific sort of points I'd like to raise...
but if we start off talking generally about Monty Python,
Meanina of Life, then if they don't come up at first then I'll
bring them in later...you said that you've seen it twice
before and you've seen it at least...
H5: at least once...I ll ve only seen it once...
Q:...so what do you think of it now and what did you think of it
when you first saw it?
H5: I think it's...not as funny as some of the other ones, like
my personal favourite's Life of Brian	 but It's got some
really funny bits in it that just sort of crack me up...
Q: Why in particular?
H5: ...sift through...bits...the Mr Creosote bit, just because of
certain things, like the way John Cleese says 'wafer thin',.I
don't know why, it just makes me really laugh...just certain
catchphrases and jus t seeing the Monty Python, when thay
dress up as women, they always use the certain voice that you
just assocnate, that it's going to be Terry Jones, or one of
them sitting there dressed up as a woman...
Q: you reckon...that's the main thing...just sticking with the
Mr Creosote sequence, I mean is there anything else about it,..
..that makes you laugh...
H5: like a key thing that...Just the'-fact that he's so obnoxious,
and the swearing's actually funny...because they're so
obviously polite to him, and he's being so revolting biek
that sort of sticks in my mind as...you know, from before,
'cos as the film was going through I was starting to remember
just vague bits...I didn't remember it as much as I thought
I would and then and then suddenly when the restaurant scene
came on I remembered oh, it's going to be Mr Creosote, and
the name as well is so stupid...
Q: Are there any bits that you particularly found funny the first
time that you felt didn't work this time?
115 No I don't think so I think all the funny bits were those ones
that I recognized again this time and made me laugh again,
like the fish with the faces, that's another thing I remember
from the other time, 'Morning, morning' it's like a ...
especially having worked in an office it really made me
laugh even more, because I used to sit and think that when I
used to work in an office...bored out of my skull I used to
look at everyone saying 'good morning' I used to imagine them
with fish bodies...s o I don't think any bits didn't work again
...if anything they worked more, you know, because...
Q: Which were your sort of favourite...
117: The Mr Creosote bit...I really liked that...when that come on
I did remember a lot of it...as with other bits, but more so
with that particular thing, I was actually laughing before
things...sort of come up...also the Northern scene, the life...
Catholic family...that was pretty good
115: The bit I likeas well is that, the death one, the final bit,
where he says 'the salmon mousse' (laughter)...makes me
laugh...because you don't expect it, the grim reaper, and
they're treating him as if he were just a guest...it's the
politeness thing, you know, taking the mickey out of everyone
being so polite, which I think is...
Q: One of the things I try to get pinned down sometimes is sort
of particular...for some people it seems to be particular
things that they find, that they go for, whereas...you seem
to pinpoint quite a few different things, I mean you've
already said, something surprising or absurd, the unexpected...
and you mentioned performance, enjoying John Cleese performing
in...the waiter and everything and then there's Mr Creosote
being so obnoxious, so horrible, so there are several things
already,but you doi01 feel there's one is more important
than the others or...
115: No, I don't think so because they all make you laugh in a
different way
117: In certain sketches I think certain ideas come over more than
others, like in the grim reaper sketch what appealed to me
was the fact that the people were so patronising and nice and
that I thought was really funny whereas, somethin g like, to
me in the Northern sketch that was so sort of silly and absurd
and they're equally as funny in their own different way...you
didn't get, I feel you don't get a mixture of both...in the
other things
Q: I noticed you laughing, that's something you haven't mentioned
this time, that there were quite a lot of points at which you
were laughing at 'the dirty bits' so to speak, I mean the
'Penis song' (laughter)...you responded quite 'well' to that;
what do you think is funny about that?
H7: I think it's the way that it's done, I mean if...because it's
done in that 'Noel Coward' manner, sort of helps it along...
I mean if Benny Hill come along and just sort of sung it, the
way someone like Benny Hill would do it...to me, it would just
be for it's own sort of sake, it would sort of fall flat, but
the way they do it, it's...the waY they go about and present
...a joke or whatever, it's not just sort of flung right at
you, it's well...it's got a good foundation, it's well sort
of built up...
H5: It's like on that particular bit where the Noel Coward song...
the expressions on their face, there's something about the
faces, like...Eric Idle's sort of...roel Coward face just
tickled me anyway, plus the fact that it was a really funny
song...about a penis...the
H7:	 and the whole surroundings as well, it's totally...
H5: ...and the people, the way they're looking and 'Oh, how
marvellous', you know, afterwards...i ust like they would...
in the normal Noel Coward...Noel Coward type film, you know...
the expressions as well I think...
Q: What about, there are various other points like in the 'Every
sperm is sacred' sketch, where...' mean how do you think...
there are comments in there like the boy saying 'Couldn't you
have had your balls cut off'...how do you think those sorts
school sequence, John Cleese the teacher talking about vaginal
juices and everything...how do you think those things work?
H5: In the Catholic scene, that bit about when the little boy
says 'why don't you have your balls cut off?', I didn't
actually think that was very funny, compared to other things,
(H7 agrees) and yet in the other sketch, the one about the
vagina/ juices, that made me laugh, but I think that's because
it was John Cleese saying it, do you know what I mean, it
wasn't necessarily what he was saying, it's just the way he...
sort of, Basil Fawlty type, 'vaginal jtlices', you know, it
just made me laugh, whereas the little boy saying it, I sort
of...it didn't actualit make me laugh...
H7: With the *school scene it was sort of...like the whole way it
was done...it's just not that sort of thing, to sort of gay
those sort of things in that sort of public school sort of
surrounding	 and the whole sort of atmosphere, the whole sort
of context of all that 1,;...fto sort of _44-444-e--ve-11.. .that's
what I found funny about it...
kA4Prozw
Q: So...very very crudely, as you probably saw, the way I split
it up into sections, I mean there was one section then which
was about sex, more or less,...and the next section was more
to do with fighting and violence...do you remember which you
responded more to?
H7: Doesn't immediately spring to mind that I responded to one'
more than the other
Q: I'll look it up afterwards...(laughter)
H5: I don't think I...I think I found the sex one funnier, I
think the fighting one 1...that was the one with the tiger
and everything, wasn't it,biting the leg, I don't think I
found that...I felt that went on a little bit, as if it was
it wasn't brilliantly funny, it sort of went on a bit, but it
was still very funny, but it wasn't...
Q: Y es, yes...do you feel it's got something to do withthe
structure of the sketches themselves rather than the fact that
it's...one's about sex and the other one's about...chopping
bodies up and...well, somebody losing their leg and
H7: I think sometimes it's the structure of the sketches 'cos
I've found that before with some other Monty Python things
that sometimes things can seem to be a bit laboured, a bit..,
try to drag everything out a bit, sometimes...
Q: Actually I agree with you that tonight for the first time I
found myself watching the Zulu war sketch, and realizing that
when the doctor's, when Graham Chapman's seeing and looking
at the leg, I was watching John Cleese and Michael Palm, and
they were standing there doing absolutely nothing; I mean
that's unusual, in a sense in a lot of other sketches would
be a lot faster, as you say, but there, it's just sort of,
you know, one person talking and others just standing there
doing doirg nothing, which is really what you're saying...
To go back to something l.said right at the beginning
about the questionnaires, or rather filling in the sheets
about how funny do you find this, did you have any problems
with that?...deciding...
H5:  ..that was the initial one you sent to us...
Q: no, no, this is the one you filled in during the film. How
funny do you find the various parts of the film...did you
have any problems with that...
H7: No, not really, no...
Q; ...because...several people who did the quiestio...who did that
said that it's very difficult to decide, like for instance the
first section, the Crimson Permanent Assurance, people said
well I liked it, I enjoyed it but 1 didn't find it funny.
H7: Yes, there are some sort of clever things in that, but not
sort of things that would actually make you sort of laugh out
loud; all the way through, I suppose I was sort of smiling to
myself, and every time I've seen that, I've found that better
every time, because when I first saw it, I remember thinking,
'this is a bit	 naff' but every time I've seen it, it's got
better; but there's nothing in there that would actually you
know really make me laugh, but I enjoyed that, it was good...
clever things in there...funnyolever...it was good...
Q: Did either of you notice any other moments in the film when
there's something else other than just finding something
funny?
117: The animation at the very beginning I though was good, yes,
there's some good bits in there... that was clever, that was
well, some good symbolic things, it was well structured...
115: Something I found odd was the, you know the Zulu bit, we were
saying about and Eric Idle, they go past all the injured ones
and Eric Idle sort of says, 'I	 this great hers, I kill
fifteen, I get a medal, if I was back home they'd fucking
hang us l ...he says something like that, and that I found odd
because that's...they often say, you know, they're always
getting at people, various institutions and whatever, but
I can't remember sort of seeing something where you,.,they
do it as blatant as that, do you know what I mean that was
more like a real sort of statement against you know...
117 : ...that wasn't quite as subtle as other things...is it...
H5: No, that's right, normally it's quite comic, but that was like
quite sort of you know, direct and I thought, blimey, that's
met really like Monty Python...that's something that sticks
in my mind as being...
H7: ...but it was still funny though
H5: ...oh yes it was still very funny, but in a different sort of
way, 'cos it made you, you know it wasn't...they didn't then
take the piss out of it again, it was just sort of that was
it, you know...
Q: Yes I mean that's to do as well with the question of surprise
or shock...there why is it funny, I mean as you say it's
still funny though...then what is it that's funny about that
particular ...Eric Idle saying that...I mean I agree that one
laughs, I tend to laugh at that, but them... I think it's the
surprise or the shock of such an explicit statement in that
sontext.
117: Yes, Yes, probably...
H5: Could be, because you suddenly...you want to laugh all of a
sudden, because it has...prbably skocked you a bit and you...
laugh anyway as a release...
E7: It's absolutely true, but it seems strange to see it, but
it's so true...
Q: Yes the other thing I was thinking about, deciding about
whether something's funny or not, I mean that could be a
problem, as you said, because...one has other pleasures...
what other sorts of pleasures do you think you got from
Meaning of life that you wouldn't necessarily say it's
funny...
H5: The cleverness of the songs, I mean even though they're comic
songs, you can appreciate that they're really clever, the way
their words were put together and that, and that made you
laugh in a sort of a different sort of a way, 'cos you
suddenly thought, that was really clever, like the 'Sperm
song' and that, it made you laugh because you thought how
clever the words were as well...
Q: And then there's something you mentioned before as well, was
the performance
H5: YE yes, the way it was done...
H7: The actual sets and everything, it's not sort of cardboard
quick flashinthepan sort of sketches, they're well
structured, or well rehearsed
HI: Like the Yorkshire bit where all the blokes opening the doors
of the toilets, you know, it's just like a musical like
Oliver or something like that, but it's...
H7: There's a lot of work gone into it, it's not just
Q: Which of the i#dividuals do you each actually prefer?
H5: In the Monty Python team? I like them all, I think...the one
that does, Terry Gilliam, who does the animation, I think his
animation's brilliant, but I don't particularly find him that
funny, 'cos I know he doesn't appear in everything, but he
he's often there and I find...that he doesn't make me laugh
really...but the rest of them I	 I don't know, I, their
faces are so familiar to me now...
Q: But you wouldn't, you don't have a favourite...
H5: re, not really, no, not a favourite...
Q: What about you...
117: No, I don't have a favourite...no but I think certain People
shine in certain sketches...can't think of any examples but...
Q: Well...what sketches do you aasociate them with, I mean...what
types of sketches?
117: John Cleese always seems to be a...a middle class sort of
upright sort of chap... there alaways one chap who's always
playing women, as well...Terry Jones...
115: ...Terry Jones and Eric Idle are always sort of ...and
occasionally Michael Palin...
117: I llalways think of Terry Jones as the...as a woman...
115: as the woman with the curlers and the sort of Mrs Smokertype
l 000h', that one...
117: Chapman is the...
115: ..the stupid sort of major, or...
H7: yes, the sort of boffin...(imitation?)...comes across as that
sort of chap...I dunno...can't think of any other I've come
across in any particular character...
Q: Well again I think you've pinpointed the main diffrences...
yes 1 mean Graham Chapman was trained as a doctor, and so he
is as you say in that kind of authority figure...the colonel
and everything else...
You've just mentioned Terry Jones...well, them being in
drag...on various occasions; one thing that several people
have raised about this film is...the possibility of...well
representations (in inverted commas) of women. How do you
feel about it or do you not have any...I mean, what are the
representations of women there; you've got various characters
in drag, well Terry Jones mostly, you've got *he women at the
end, when the bloke is being sentenced for gratuitous sexist
jokes in a moving picture	 do you respond to that in any
Particular way, or...how do you feel about it...
117: No strong feelings about it, really...
115: I mean that...the fact that they...well if they hadn't said
that bit about what he's been sentenced for; if he'd been
sentenced for robbing a bank or something, then perhaps I
would have thought, oh, you know, Benny Hill again, sort of
sexist stiff, but because they put that in, he's been sentence
for gratuitous...t hat sort of made it, you know I didn't mind
that there were loads of naked wohken running across...'cos thez
it was taking the mickey out of...sexist things...
117: ...made it acceptable, it was part of	 the joke of...
Q: But is it really, I mean.., you can take it further...
115:  yes you can take it further I suppose...
Q: You could then go on to say...
115: It's a bit tricky, that, really, you don't really...I mean.
all through the Monty Python you always had likeethe old
ones with Carol Cleveland, she's always like the busty sort
of secretary, but there she's so over the top, it's almost
taking the mickey of people who...do the sexist things, you
know what I mean, it's sort of borderline...
H7: I don't like things that are just thrown at you at face value
..sort of humour that's jus t... things that are-a bit more,
have got a bit more depth in them...no matter what it's about,
I think they'd be a bit more acceptable...
Q: And you feel that that's	 for instance, yes, the represent-
ations of women; if there is that element of Parody or taking
the mickey out of the usual sexist stereotype, then that makes
it acceptable...
H7: ...yes, or funny...
H5: I find...'cos it's ohe of their...allri ght you could say that
Terry Jones is sort of, you know, debasing women, you know
there's always the fag, and the curlers and all that, but
there again when you had that Protestant scene, you had
like, Graham Chapman, you know, sort of saying 	 can go down
and buy a wotsit' and she's going 'Why don't you, why don't
you?' and it makes him out to be a real twit, so he's like a
yes, it's then taking the mickey out of a bloke that could be
like that...so I think the balance sort of makes you...you
don't get angr y , because you think well, it's balanced,
somehow...and you get the sttpid army people, you know, they
make the blokes in the army as twits, so it sort of balances
it up, it's not all against women...really they poke fun at
everyone and anyone that...you know, they can think of, so..
Q: Yes, and I think people suggested that the very fact that it's
somebody in drag, and not a woman, playing that role, does
make it quite different.(general agreement)...that you can't
talk about it in the same way...the fact that it's Terry
Jones in drag, being a cleaning woman, really isn't the same
as if it actually was a woman playing.that.
Are there any other things that...apart from the possible
thing about sexism, which I raised (la ughter)...are there any
other things, though, that...the point I'm trying to get at
is whether sometimes we laugh at things despite ourselves...
I mean, stepping outside Monty Python for a moment, maybe
sort of racist jokes, things like that...I mean I think I
have to admit that there are times when I don't want to hear
a racistjoke but somebody insists, and you smile, I'll smile,
because there's something clever about it, I mean, how do you
feel about that? Do you find yourselves, do you recognize that?
situation...
117: Oh yes...
H5: What, within Monty Python...
Q: well or else...or outside it...
H5: Yes...yes I suppose you do it, but it's also sort of a social
thing isn't it, I mean...you sort of think afterwards..,00h I
didn't really want to laugh at that...particularly, it wasn't
really funny, like another Paki joke if you want, you know,
people are always making jokes about Pakis, but,..it's too,
I suppose it's laziness, it's too much effort to sort of say
in a group of people, oh, I object to that joke, so you sort
of smile...it's an easy way out, isn't it, sort of thing...
and at the time, I suppose perhaps you don't really think
about it, it's just 'a joke'...you don't think till afterwards,
you know, I don't really like...calling someone a Paki, but
I don't know it's hard, isn't it, it's hard to sort of...
describe why you do (?)...it's a mixture of things, isn't
it... sort of an easy way out...something where you'd rather
not go against the grain, sort of thing.
Q: But it can also be I think something to do with...how good a
joke it is.
H7: Yes, yes...I agree with that...
H5: Yes, that's true, I mean you can...bad taste things you can...
.. t cos eally the jokes that are around at the minute about
the ferry. disaster, I mean, that's such a terrible thing, and
if when you thing about it in the cold light of day, you think
oh God, I should never laugh at a joke about the ferry
disaster...because it was such a terrible thing, you know...
but then when someone does a joke, and it is a pretty clever
one, like the one my dad told me the other night, I really
did laugh, but then a couple of hours later I thought well,
that was really nasty of me to laugh and I felt guilty for
laughing, but at the same time it was a good play on what
happened, you know...and it was funny when he said it to me.
But maybe I shouldn't really.. .in my heart of hearts I
wouldn't really have laughed...
117: I feel the same but I don't think I would have sort of thought
about it a couple of hours later...and feel guilty about it;
I would have laughed...I wouldn't have such strong guilt
feelings it...
115: I must admit, just purely knowing ...you know, how awful it
wa s , and the fact that I'd laughed	 I just thought well, it
wasn't really a nice thing to do, laugh at such a disaster...
it was something really...
117: ...because when things...things like that happen I almost sort
of wait for a joke to sort of occur aboutRa disaster like that
...you know a topical sort of thing.
Q: Yes, another question that might be worth asking is is it
necessarily a negative thing...I dtn't know...what I think of
it myself, but I mean is it necessarily always a bad thing to
joke about things like that?
117: It depends, the situation and who you're with at the time...
Q: I suppose so, yes, I mean what the criteria are for whether
it's a good thing or a bad thing, but you know in a sense it
might be in some situations that to make a joke of something
that is awful can be actually be like a sort of survival
istrategy...a way of coping with t
117: Yes, yes, ...v ery true
115: Mm, yes, yes, that's true. Yes, that's true, it's quite a
Yes, 'cos you can't be sort of...it's like at work...
117: Yes, I was just going to say that...
115: you know working as we do, at a training centre, if you sat
and thought about all those people in there and their
disabilities and handicaps and that, and...didn't find any of
them funny, you'd probably be a nervous wreck yourself,
wouldn't you, really, you' R be so overwhelmed by thinking,
Christ, you know it's really sad about them all, or it's
really unfortunate etcetera etcetera...if you couldn't find
things funny and laugh, you know, laugh things off...and
hake jokes, you know after hours or whatever, you know...
Q: ...in the staffroom or wherever
115: that relief isn't there, you need that relief...
H7; It's using humour as a kind of a barrier, in a wa y , isn't it?
115: I suppose it Is, or a release, sort of...
117 : ..to bounce off all your sort of distress or whatever
115: Yes, I suppose it is, only you don't really think about it
as that way, but it is an automatic relief, isn't it...for
things you can't sort of get out of you any other way
117: But I also find I've got, I sort of look for things that are
funny, as well at times
115: Yes, I do, I do
117:	 Perhaps unfartunate situations, but...maybe it is for that
reason though, as well, so I don't sort of hurt myself.
Q: Yes. I think that at an ordinary school like ours it's
probably not as...I mean there are situations which are not
as difficult...in many ways; but the same thing is happening
I think, that you know in most staffrooms you get quite a
few of the teachers making jokes about kids...and I know the
feeling that I mean I've often felt disturbed by that...I hear
other people making nasty comments about kids in a joking way,
and I don't like it really, and I can imagine that softellody
coming in from outside, off the street, would be really shocked
in a sense one of the reasons I don't like it is because I'm
aware of that ...I think God if there was somebody here
listening to this, this would be terrible, I don't like it...
on the other hand yes I have to recognizethat it's a kind of
survivalstrategy...a 'way of coping lsith the sitnatiom 141-S.th
perhaps one needs, Yes...
117: At work...I'd only share that sort of humour with certain
people, certain other members of staff, not all members of
staff...feel your way round the staff, as it were, know who
you...share that humour with...
Q: Yes, I think that's exactly right...Yes, there are people
with whom I wouldn't like to share it because I feel that
from them it actually is very...callous and I don't share
their cynicism and callousness about
115: And also you don't share it with certain people because you
think they're...that's what they'll think of you, whereas you
know you're not doing it, you don't actually mean it in a
horrible way, you're doing it because you want to make someone
laugh or you know it's going to be funny...you know if you
say it to someone, they'll go away thinking...ugh, that's
not a very flee thing to say, and yet you didn't ...you meant
it just as a humour thing and you didn't really do it against
that particular client or whatever...
Q: Is there anything like that...I mean, it's a different
situation, but...get back to Meaning of Life; is there
anything else apart from possible sexism, are	 here any
other things floating around which you feel could be
objectionable...not only to you, to people in general...
117: I suppo se there could be quite a few things, really...
115: What any aspect, now, we're talking about... There's something
that stuck in my mind in the Catholic scene with all the
children, which didn't...doesn't upset me, bu a friend of
mine, I remember saying that she watched Meaning of  Life and
found it really funny but was really shocked by the fact that
there was like lots of children in that part of the film and
they were all talking about, you know, sperm...whatever else
was in the song, and she found that really objectionable
because she thought they shouln't have used children for the
film in that respect and got them to sing all that because
that was, you know that was...a gainst their innocence etcetera
etcetera, which npver really dawned on me, because I sort of
found it funny, kids- you know singing 'sperm' etceteraetceterat
but when she said it I thought well...that could be very
upsetting for a lot of people, especially parents, I mean
I'm not a parent, so...you knew, perhaps that's why I didn't
particularly think of it as being in that way, but the way
they said it..it suddenly struck...well yes, that is right,
really that's pretty objectionable, a little kid, that high,
saying, you know, 'why don't you have your balls cut off'...
that's quite...
Q: On the other hand, yes...that's, it's objectionable possibly
for the parents, but I mean there are plenty of kids around
who would be sa ying...a lot worse than that anyway, s...
E5: Yes, that's true...that's true
Q: Who is...who is one actually offending and why...yes I mean
nobody else has mentioned that point, it's something I've
sort of sort
115: It just stuck in my mind...I forget who it was...I think it's
someone I used to work with, when they were talking about it,
a good while ago, said that bit, you know, they enjoyed it all
but they found that bit really objectionable because of that
.but that never really struck my mind until I saw it tonight,
I suddenly remembered them saying it...
117: I suppose the transplant scene can be seen as sort of sick...
over the top...
115: ...just purely because	 the blood spurting, and
also like when they're dropping the babies, I mean I found
that really funny but someone might think that's.., because
they do look really realistic...I mean let's face it...they're
covered in blood and sort of and like the actual birth scene,
it really does look, I know they're wobbling (?) it about and
...you know...it's obviously a rubber baby or whatever but it
does look very realistic...
117: I suppose the Kr Creosote sketch is well could be...
115: Yes, 'cos it's all...being sick and whatever...but I find
the humour in that overrides the possible revolting bit it
could be, to me, it's overridden by the humour...
Qs ...you've got to be, you've got to be careful about what you
mean by humour...(laughter) because what you laugh it...
H71 Yes, it's an individual thing, really, isn't it...
Q: I mean that's...there are two different apparently opposite
sort of sets of research that people found...seem to have
found; one is that people laugh or find funny things which
they kind of have a sort of an emotional investment in, an
anxiety about... you know, if you're actually worried about
illness you actually find it more funny...because it's a
sort of release from the tension that one normally feels
about it, and other people seem to have found the opposite,
that if one has, like you said, and also if one has a relative
who is ill or you know somebody in hospital having some sort
of operation, then one isn't going to find the Liver rransplan'
thing funny...I mean there seem to be kind of opposed sets of
results...
115: I was thinking...saying about that...that's true because...
with, like Derek and Clive, this is going away a bit from
Monty Python and that, but you know Derek and Clive...when
I was younger I used to sort or-...(?)...I us ed to find
everything funny and they do a hell of a lot of sketches
about cancer, aid they really are quite horrific about it,
do you know whit I mean, but, I used to you know I find that,
really, well I found it hysterically funny, and then my nu
died of cancer, and after that, I still found it funny, but
it had a sore note, and I couldn't aid nowadays, if I
listen to them I can't...I can.still find it funny hut it's
notp-it's got a dead note about it...(laughter)...that's a
bad choice of words: but a sort of a...you know, because it's
obviously got quite close to my heart, you know and it's sort
of...whereas before I was like...you know I can remember just
rolling about on the floor and it was so funny the way they
were singing these songs about cancer and whatever and...
because it struck home with me, with the death of me pans and
then it, after that I can't really look at it in thee same
light, it doesn't really...it's still funny, but it's not...
and I feel a bit guilty thinking that I was you know laughing
so much about it...
SO in that situation it seems to be working against it,
whereas for instance in the sort of situation you were
talking about in a, you know school or institution where
one is concerned with say handicapped people...there one is
actually more likely to find perhaps jokes abuilt handicap
in some ways more acceptable because it's a...see what I
Neas...(agreemient)...but I dare say it's not as simple as
that...
H5: It's probably like the times you laugh and there's really a
deeprooted reason probably, you can't even...someone has
to probably work out with you what it is, I would think...
like you were saying about Mr Creosote sketch, perhaps it is
something deeper than just. (?)...-.
I think it's got a lot, I mean one of the things that
every body laughs at ono way or another in that sketch...
I shouldn't say everybody, but everybody I've come across,
laughs at One way or another in that sketch is when he's
actually being sick...what kind of laughter is it?...that's
the thing...
H7: Probably the sort of laughter that it's so revolting, it's
happening so much, that...everybody hates being sick
themselves, that it's just...a kind of strange sort of
relief, I supPose...a nd also the fact...nobody could ever
be that sick...such amounts, it must be some sort of...
H5: I think it's that shock thing as well, isn't it 'cos you
say, you know, he just sort of...pukes up everywhere, and
you're sort of, you're quite shocked and in a way...I don't
know if you're embarassed or not but it's a feeling of a sort
of embarassment 'cos you think oh, he's being sick, and you
immediately laugh, like a sort of an embarassed laugh almost,
know what I mean, sort of a...and then you do begin to find
it funny, but the sort of first reaction you sort of think
oh, I better laugh...
H7: You shouldn't be doing that...funny, it's that sort of thing...
H5: Yes, yes
Q: But I feel the most effective and shocking part moment in that
is when hessuddenly sick all over the menu, I think that's a
bit unexpected	 comes out so quickly...
H5: ..that's right, and he holds it up and it drips out the
bottom...
H7: yes, and it splatters everywhere...
Q: ...folds...folds it with...(imitate splatch)
H7: It's incredibly realistic, I think everyone's...not sick over
a menu, but they know what...it's sort of like: sort of rings
H5: there's a lot of realistic things in there, like the sick
really looks like sick and the babies really look like new-
born babies, and the liver really looks like it's, you knou
...the way they do it, so they do make it very very
H7: ..which I suppose again goes back to the...overall enjoyment
of the things that...props and scenes and everything are well
done ...it might be so funny if it didn't look like sick, if
it looked like water, or the baby looked like a cardboard-
cutout or something...
Q: ...there is a moment though when, the last time he's sick on
John Cleese's leg, it seems to just go off hie leg like
water...(laughter)...notieed that...next time you See it,
whtch out for thatL
Yes I mean, Derek and Clive, I've actually jotted down as
one of my things ...in relation to 'pure smut l ...dirtiness and
the jokeform...said that-perhaps the audience reaction to
Derek and Clive could be gauged, I mean I've actually toyed
with the idea of playing a Derek and Clive tape to people and
saying...how to you respond to that, but I think that goes
further, as you say, than Monty Vython, anyway, but I mean...
how far can you go with just being crude, which it degenerates
into, and people still finding it funny...
H5: When I, when I first heard of Derek and Clive and heard their
records, the swearing and everything really I found, like I
say about the cancer, hysterically funny, I mean I could spend
just hours just killing myself laughing, just because there it
was like One swearword after another, but now I mean sort of
a couple of years later or whatever, unless it's just me
that's changed but I, sort f...it's not as funny; I still
find certain things funny, but it's almost as if to say...
swearing isn't as funny any more...for some reason then it
really really made me laugh my head off...but...I don't know,
perhaps I was more carefree in those days...
H7: I've never found that as funny...as Monty Python...yes, I've
always found it a bit sort of gratuitous of swearing and all
sorts of things...some of it was humorous but overall I don't
thiMk it's quite...as well structured, if you like, as Monty
Python is...I think a lot of it's sort of...it's not scripted
or anything anyway is it...it's very loosely, it seems to be
very loosely sort of...
E5: ...and yet that's something that made me...I found funnier
becaude of the fact that it's just them sitting in the thing
getting drunk...you know just...spouting out all these things,
and some of the answers they gave used to really tickle me
cos it was like really off the cuff sort of stuff...
Q: ...let me see if there's anything else...umm...yes I mean
what...you haven't been watching the original series, have
you seen the original series at any time, or...
H5: ummm, I j ust saw...I didn't see the very original ones because
...(2) but...ones they repeated on Saturday night, I saw One
a friend of mine had taped; I didn't find it as funny as
their more recent things...by recent / don't mean just the
films or whatever, but their more recent series...
Q: ...the last series was '74...
115: 'cos they're the ones I remember...the more uptodate series,
not the...the (???) those sort of ones...
Q: Yes but they only made four series, that was between '69 and
'74...
H5: well I think the ones I caught must have been rikht at the
end of that, because those ones they're repeating on Saturdays
I don't remember, and to me they look more dated than the ones
I do remember, 'cos I, the ones I do remember was when I was
in junior school, which_ must have been '74, 'cos '69 I was
only, what four (laughter)...but yet when the last series
was on-I was then in junior school and that's when I first
discovered,- you know, what it was and that, so...I caught
the end of the series...
Q: Yes...have you seen...
Hp I can actually remember the first ones ever being on telly,
I was nine then...I can remember being fascinated by them;
some things were funny, obviously for a different reason
then, it was totally different from any ether sort child-
like humour on TV- at the time, and I think, I suppose over
the years I must have seen quite a bit of the old series,
'cos they've been repeated so many times...I suppose I've
heard more, OR records, as well, 'cos when I was at, when I
started secondary school I had a group of friends that used
to sit and recite things parrotfashion, which after a while
took the edge off-, the funny edge off...
Q: yes...I was talking to somebody in fact last night...doing
it in London with a group, who was also nine when the first
series came out and said he used to stay up with his...fight
to stay up with his...saying 'I want to stay up and watch this'
and he said it was great because it was so different...
B7: Yes, yes, I can remember just being amazed, it was you know...
I wasn't rolling about on the floor...I was thinking crikelY1
really different...
Q: ..but in general, what sort of people would you imagine
would have been watching that, or what sort of people would
you say it would appeal to...
B7: At the time?
Q: Yes; either at the time or...
117: Maybe a fairly wide group of people but for different
reasons, different...because it's...it's not like certain
comedy series that you know will be the same all the way
through...I mean it will always be slightly different and
slightly, I can't describe it, wacky, way out, or whatever,
but things will be, they'll be varied every week, it won't
be like a sitcom...it won't be like a Benny Bill, where you
knew the jokes are going to be roughly the same every week,
it won't be that sort of thing, so I suppose it could appeal
to a wider variety of people at different times, different
things, whether they're...all those people would sit down
and watch it all at once, to get their one little bit out of
it all at the same time, if you see what I mean, I don't
think you can just say it'll be just those sort of people
who'll like it...
Q: Is general, I mean it does seem to me that there are a lot
of people who actually wouldn't want that umpredicUbility,
who actually prefer something predictable and something where
they know what they're going to get.
H5: I should imagine...I always imagined that it appealed to
people that were very openminded, right from when I first
if I sort of met people that dldn't...like it or when I
played their record didn't find it funny, then that used to
quite colour my judgement about them...do you know what I
mean, I used to sort of think, / remember someone coming to
our house when I was younger, and we were all sort of mucking
about mr whatever and finding out that this friend of my
dad's or whatever didn't like Monty Python, and then I...and
I then began to sort of notice...I don't remember whether I
really noticed or whether I was just imagining it, that he
was really sort of quiet and boring anyway, do you know what
I mean, it just seemed, seemed to fit along with it, but
117: Yes...openminded...
H5: Yes...I couldNit really...you did get, used to get a lot of
comments if you used to be talking about (?) or something...
there'd often be one person in the group that would say '011,
that's horrible'...you always seemed to get, always seemed
to get one person that, especially at school ..you'd be
doing, you know, mucking about, and, like you say reciting
bits out of the sketches or something..Ldid you ever see that
one or 'did you ever hear that one?' or whatever, and there'd
always be one person going 'oh, why do you want to look at
that,' and yet, to me, that put me off that person, even
though they might hsve been the nicest person going, I was
sort of...you know I thought 'you're so boring and staid...'
Qs Do you think it...would you also have associated it with
115: I don't think so because when. I got into it I was...yes I was
in second or third year at junior school, and me and my friend
got into it and a few of the friends at school, but it seemed
to be a moremit_ certainly seemed a more adult humour because
we played it in junior school once, we used to have a record
session atthe end. of the day or something, and the teacher
found it really funny, and the four of us found it really,
ea I think it was five of us that found it really funny, and
all the other... classroom of kids were looking blankly; they
couldn't understand it, it sort of went right over their
heads, and there was just like our little crowd really
laughing, and the teacher really finding it funny, but, to
then, it just went over their heads, and I found...I suPPose
I found it was normally people older than me at the time,
When I was at junior school, yet, there was people...only a
minority of people my age liked it, it was more older people;
Perhaps that's what attracted it to me as well, I don't know
cos it was lder people, 'cos it was like, my dad enjoyed it,
and my mum enjoyed it, and my sisters e*joyed it, and I found
it funny, so it made me feel perhaps a bit more grown up...
Q: Weil that's interesting because ...I think...a lot of people
would say that the thing they liked was that the peergroup
would enjoy it but maybe their parents and the neat generation
didn't...
H5: ...to me, it's the other way round...but then I've always
been a bit...I've always wanted to be older than I was...not
now,not nowl...the age I am, but when I was...(laughter)...
now I don't want to get any lder, but...when I was youger I
can always remember I never really wanted to be, I enjoyed
having friends and everything, you know,..my friends, but I
always wanted to be that bit older, I always seemed to be
interested in things that bit older than what people expected
me to be interested in, and...the cause of that I used to
have a wide range of friends from an early age who were all
different ages * not all...one age group...so perhaps that was
just an individual thing the fact that...I liked it because
me dad liked it
E7: I think now, because of the timespan that it's been or,
there's ob-viously a wider agegroup of people that appreciate
it now * but at the time, maybe that agegroup was a lot
slimmer...I'd certainly appreciate it more now than I did
when I was younger...I liked. it...but I found it perhaps
fascinating when I was younger...
115: I found when I was younger it taufht me a hell of a lot as
well...
H7:	 find it a lot more humorous and enjoyable (on the whole)
now...
Rs I think that could...perhaps...I don't know what that depends
on because I've had...most people say * most people who saw it
at the time say that they feel it's dated a lot, now they
don't find it nearly so funny...one or two other people have
said, like you...but the other person I'm thinking of in
Particular is fortyone or something, and didn't see very
much of it at the time, he just saw one or two, but now he's
seen a few of these things on...he finds it so good...so it
seems to be somet4ing...
N5:. You've had so many things in betweentimes that have gone
along the lines of Monty Python...you've had so many things
good and bad * that ROW when you see the really old episodes,
Perhaps they do look a bit dated, just purely because you've
had so much other stuff that you've...enjoyed a lot of...
117: ...you tend to forget the original...
E5: ...that's right, and Ion begin to think well, when you 7(31
see it again you tend to think well that's been done before,
but it's been done by the copiers of Monty Python, but you
d'you know what I mean, you sort of...you sort of think well,
I've seen that type of person come on before in another
sketch in Not The Nine O'clock News or...
117: ..as I say when I was at school people used to sort of
recite it parrotfashion, and I used to actually find it a
bit boring then probably because I wasn't sitting watching
them doing it, I was listening to somebody repeating it
badly and...not putting it over as well...
Q: Yes I wonder what the pleasure was or is of learning things
like that...
H7: I don't know but I can think of two or three people at school
that used to...
H5: But a lot of people...people do it now, it's almost as if to
say, you know, are you in the club of the Monty Python fans,
sort of thing...
H7: ...they're not sort of laughing doing it, or anything...
H5: ...'cos if you say something now, someone, you know, someone
says something and you think oh they're fishing to see who
.sort of knows...
END OF RECORDING.
TAPE 2: SlO.L17 
L10: ...yes...I think I'm a little move...looser than I was when
/ came in...a little more...happier.
Q: Yes...and watching it...did that...
L10: Yes. yes
Q: Imean I've got a few things written down, a few specific
sort of points which I'd like to get round to but we could
start offwith some...generally...how did you find it..'
V17: I liked the length of each item...for me they weren't too
long, but long enough to hold your interest even if the
particular type of humour in it didn't particularly appeal
to me...it always held my interst.
L10: Yes.
Q: Why do you think it held your interst; what particular
elements do you think might have...
L17: I think for me, the fact...I like the personas of the people
in Monty Python anyway, 1 like seeing them in other things
...like Eric rdle in the Mikado, Terry Jones in chat shows,
and things like that...
Qs .-..you've seen the Mikado...
L17: Yes. So...I feel that I like them as people even though I
don' tknow them at all...so that helps
Q: Do you think that...one question that puzzles me is the
distinction, if there is a distinction, between something
that's funny...the pleasure of finding something funny, ad
the othAr sorts of pleasures like recognizing an acter or a
performer, or a comedian you like, that's actually pleasurable
but can one then say it's ...funny...
L10: Yes I	 was going to ask you actually, because that form I
found actually quite hard to answer, because it was
specifically 'funnyt ; and a lot of that I didn't find
funny; I found it absorbing, and I found it quite interesting,
especially the first one...
L17: ...yes ...I put '/' for the first one, but I found it clever,
but I didn't find it...funny...
L10: Yes...I didn't find it funny...but I also found it hard on
scale ...1 found myself on the scale being somewhat
accommodating, you know what I mean? I thought well ...it
was enjoyable so I kind of gave it a higher mark...than I
actually felt that it was funny. The first one was a good
example of that...I liked it...
Q: Yes...yes. So that distinction between pleasure and
funniness is a real one...a difficulty in a way, isn't it...
LiO: Yes...yes. And I noticed as well that wherever there was
something with John Cleese I enjoyed it much more...hut I
also found it funnier; but I'm not sure why that was; as I
was watching it and as I was noticing it I was wondering, is
it because it is John Cleese and I associate certain things
with John Cleese, or is it actually because it is funnier...
I find, I think, I think it is actually because he is
funnier, because his commercials on television I don't find
funny at all, but that's John Cleese, but his timing in this,
and he seemed to have better lines, probably because he wrote
his own lines, and his timing is very good.
Q: But it's interesting that you say you don't find the
commercials funny because in a sense what you said at the
beginning, you know if you see somebody that you do basically
find funny, the chances are, you'll find it at least slighlty
funny...amusing
I40: Right... right.
Q: ...so it obviously is also dependent on what's actually
there...
R10: ...the material...
Q: If you're predisposed by...you're probably more likely to
find it funny...
What about the parts of the film, I mean which parts
did you generally find more enjoyable or funny, I mean we
can talk about both...
S17: I liked the 'Every sperm is sacred' one which, I'd heard
about it befsmep friends had seen it, though, but with that
one, it didn't really detract, there was so much going on,
the singing and dancing, whereas the one where, the fat man
exploded, the fact that I knew the puschline in that
probably detracted from it...
Q; You think it did, I mean how did you respond to it otherwise?
I17: I think I...made allowances for it...it wasn't...I didn't
think that was an (cog ent) I really got pleasure out of, I
didn't like just the sickness...I didn't find that at all
funny...
MO: I didn't either...L just thought it was gross
Q: You Were laughing at it though...
VIO: Well I was laughing at John Cleese I think	 again. Because
I felt that he Was very...I was laughing at him and I was
laughing at the parody, you know, of waiters...I found
myself doing that quite a lot, actually, I was lAughing at
what it was getting at but not actually it
D17: Yes I find that as well, like the Hawaiian...neal...reminded
me stately homes...trying to get tourists in...
L10: ...or these things in London, you know these London dungeon...
things like that...I found myself laughing at what, almost
what it implied, but net actually at the lines...I also found,
a similar example was the...the birth, birth? where she was
you know? I thought that was hilarious...
L17: I was relati g it to my own experiences in hospital and
everything..	 laugh.I suppose it did trigger off
something else...
100: It was funny too because I was just reading something about
birth, and about natural childbirth ...and stuff and there
was film of, I was watching a film of a German, the way they
give birth in German maternity hospitals, and it was
identical to that...literall y in that everything was
mechanical, everything was machine...every birth in Germany
is forced, because they only give birth between nine in the
morning and six in the evening, when the hospitals are open,
Q: ...so there again, yollre in a different position, having
read that...you'll find that funny in a different way f* om
L10: right...right.
Q: Something you raised just now, which reminded me of the
distinction between jokes and other kinds of humour or
comedy...I was talking to (L21) yesterday and that came up;
there's nbt very much in the way of jokes, you know in terms
of standup comedians, telling a joke...can you think in
terms of jokes with a film like this?
L17: The opposite, I kept thinking sometimes of, you know, I was
thinking I wish they'd have a few oneliners, Just to sort
of, you know, get me going again, that I am liking the idea
of what's going on but you know, it's not, the individual
lines just aren't quite funny enough.
Q: Tes...I think there are points where there are a few lines,.,
LIO: I can't think of any bu I'm sure there were...
L17: I mean some of them, quite a few of them...proportion came
in the songs.
Q: I think even...in the Liver Transplant thing, I mean...Yes,
I mean, can one call them jokes, when the kid comes in and
just casually says 'Cheerio see you later'...I mean is that
a 'joke'? There is an argument for saying that it is, but...
I think...another thing that can replace, I'd like to
know how you fe#1 about, is when 'smut' shall we say, just
showing a bottom or talking about penises or something like
that, do you feel that that can sometimes be a source of
comedy whthout it being in the context of...
L17: I was just thinking, when I was actually watching it, you
know if I-T d actually seen it when it came out It, would maybe
have found it funnier...the barebreasted women running
after the guy, things like that, whereas now, just think
maybe in a few years we've become more jaded with things
like that, more...
L1O: I was thinking the same thing...actually...somehow Monty
Python humour aged very quickly...or they're superceded by
other...other things...you know like...what was it, that
Q: Not The Nine O'clock News?
L10: The History Of the Cinema, you know, The History...somehow
there was a similarity between that and this...and, well,
the barebreasted wohen...
Q: Yes...that's another thing I was going to ask is...hOw
particular, in particular issues, the fact that you might
feel strongly about something, whether it. might be feminism,
a sort of feminism, reacting to images of women, or it
might be specific things like illness...you might have a
relative who is ill or recently died or something, and
then, somebody was saying to me that the coffin, when
this sort of corpse gets up, and says 'and mine' actually
did upset them a bit, simply because it reminded them of
somebody having just died, so I mean how...
L17: I think...again...kaybe I was analysing that because my
father actually has cancer at the moment and I was wondering
why.-..if that was because I wasn't really enjoying the
Grim Reaper one	 but I don't think so...
L10:	 just didn't particularly like the 'Grim Reaper' in fact,
L17: ..it was a bit unsubtle...wasn't it...and it was like the
one joke wheat on...OK they were sending up that type of
sort of behaviour, the American and English middle-class
behaviour, but again I kept wanting some nice one-liners,
or something...
L10: ,..and I felt like I'd seen it before, as well...like it
had been done before
L17: I did like it when they went to heaven and all the people
from the rest of the film were there,...I did like that...
although they didn't do anything with them except have them
there, that wasthe beginning and end of the joke...
Q: I noticed...I mean I was wondering...sometimes the same
actor is there twice; at one point Terry Jones is one of
the women in the Grim Reaper sequence, he's also on the
screen, his back is there, as the liver donor's wife...but
that obviously is..somebody else shot from the other side...
but going back to that, I mean, say the images of women, for
instance, I maen,..is there a problem with some of the
gaga?
L17: Not in that...that's not...I don't find...
100: I don't know...Yes there is and at the same time I just kind
of let it go by; I mean I found that exploding fat man really
gross...and I also found myself looking at, looking at his
remains, you know to See how much they were giving...you
know what I mean...like just exactly how much blood and guts
are they going to give us...but I didn't, I didn't...I didn't
find that offensive but I didn't like it either...and I felt
the same about the liver, the liver transplant...where I
actually felt, I actually kind of felt that something had
left me...you know that feeling...(?)...as he was pulling
these bits out and cutting them off...
Q: ...you find yourself sort of...
that it was actually like...I didn't like it but at the same
time it...it wasn't revolting...it was...it wasn't even
kind of particularly close to, it hard actually to describe,
how I felt about it...
Q: Because in a way it is fairly you could say explicit, I mean
you don't actually see the body being hacked up...
L10: In a way it's fairly explicit but at the same time it's done
so tongue in cheek, because it's so over the top...
L17: ..and like the woman, mean, most of the womens' roles and
that are men dressed up as women, and you look at them and
you see they're men dressed up, they're not really supposed
to be representing women...
Q: Yes...yes, I think that's quite a cmueial point...that as
far as, there are two points, I mean,..I don't know, maybe
you should comment on this...where I felt a bit uneasy about
sort of the fact that representations of women are the vomeR
chasing the bloke at the end, practically naked,...
LI7: ...there again, it's through his eyes, that is very much his
fantasy, he's not...the film's not really saying women are
like this...
Q: ..yes...but I mean it's...
L17: but I didn't like the camera shot on the OA the woman's,
sort of...breasts going up and down, but again, I thought
well, the excuse, it's supposed to be this man's fantasy...
Qs Yes, I mean he's convicted of making...but I mean, I thought
that's a bit of a cheap...getout, isn't it, of making cheap
sexist jokes in a motion picture	 what are you doing then?
(agreement from others). And also the graphics when Eric
Idle's singing the song, abut halfway through, when they
step out of the liverdonor's house...
L10: The graphics of being...of birth.
tQ: Yes
L10: I vaguely remember that...
L/7: I didn't mind that, I though it was quite (clevertgood)
actually...
L10: Yes...' thought the one at the beginning was very clever...
Q: Yes, I enjoyed it...
L10: No...I didn't find that...
Q: ...because...there seems something aggressive or violent
about it, the way in which she's impregnated...
As You say, the men in drag...makes it in a sense
different...like for instance the woman...the cleaning-
woman...in the Mr Creosote, exploding Mr Creosote...being
vomited over...some people objected to...you didn't feel
L17: I just...I didn't like that whole idea that...it was
presumably supposed to be very funny that this guy kept
vomiting and vomiting...
L10: No, I didn't particularly like it...
Q: I don't know if this, I mean is it worth asking why ...or...
why do you think some people would find it funny?
L17: IsuPPose that some...some people's humour's a bit more,
sense of humour's a bit more basic than mine, but I mean
I can...laugh at slapsticktype humour as well, I den't
know,..
Q: Then what is...
107: I sometimes do find jokes about bodily functions funny,
sometimes I don't...
Q: Yes, because that's what I mean, what is a more basic sense
of humour?
L17: I mean there just doesn't seem to be anything apart from,
that was the joke, it wasn't many other context, OK he was
being sick so as he could make room for something else, but
you know there just didn't seem enough to it, you know, he
just was being sick all the time...
L10: Ma. I mean I find it, I find it...amusing, because I kind
of...as a parody of highclass restaumants, and if you've
ever been to a highclass restaurant where the waiters are
so pernickety, they put the napkin in your lap and stuff...
and then if you imagine this big fat guy vomiting in a
restaurant like that, then it's hilarious...but without that
part of me in it, I wouldn't have found it funny...without
what I brought to it...you know...
Q : I mean in a sense you're back to something I raised earlier
OA abou pure, just 'mut' being funny, in a sexual sense,
you're saying the same thing about bodily functions, in a
way, just the fact that you show it can be funny and...
that's what I'm interested in; when is it funny...is what
circumstances is it funny just for the bodily function to be
mentioned or shown, and when does it need to be in a context?
...a 'joke' context...
L17: I suppose quite often if the humour has been a bit-
sophisticated and then suddenly joke is dropped in, like
bodily function or whatever, it is funny just for the...
contrast of what's gone before, the sheer unexpectedness of
it...whwereas that, it was straight into the sketch and that
was it, there was this fat man wandering in and.. .being
sick...
But I did, as I said I noticed that *ou were laughing...
at that very point...but as then you also said...it was nor.
John Cleese...
I didn't like the way that sketch ended 'follow me t ...I found
that quite a lot, with this one actually...I hadn't seen this
one. the last film I saw was the Life of Brian, which I did
enjoy, because it was more cohesive, it made more sense as a
story, as a plot.., and this I found quite disappointing...
because a lot of the ideas it seemed to me could have been
greatpand had great moments, but didn't quite achieve
complete...greatness
Q: Why would that be?What would they have needed?
L10: Weill. to developthem, to develop things more, or keep then
going longer, in a lot of cases; I really enjoyed the...John
Cleese's sex education class, Ithought that was very funny,
and I...I Particularly liked the way, the kids' reaction to
it, just boredom, and...I thought that was very...but it
could have had more to it, it could have gone on longer or
it could have been developel...there were so many things
like that, it was a great idea and then it would be backed
up or something and then there'd be a filler...like the...
what wae the Yorkshire sketch?...the Semen song...
Li?: 'Every Sperm is Sacred'
100: 'livery Sperm is Sacred' ...I mean I didn't, I didn't...I liked
it, I liked it, but I didn't like the song, and I thought
the song went on far too long
Q: Really?
L10: Yes...
CI: Yes... I half share that, I felt he song was great when it
was indoors, but then when it gets outdoors it just sort of..,
L10: ...right...
107: I thought that was good, like the men coming out of the
toilets and...things like that, just sort of sending up...
something that's subtly choreographed...
L 10: Yes...
Q: Yes,I thinkthat's...that's right, maybe that's why there's
that switch; I didn't appreciate thatso much but I can see
that it's a different, it's aiming at a different...it's a
sendupof that, as opposed to what was happening indoors,
which was, you're listening to the words of the song, that's
what the joke was about
1,10: Right...right
Q: Um...another thing...do you, sort of, how do you feel about
exaggeration? Can you think of any examples of exaggeration
fromthis film?
L17: Well the man exploding.(?) and exploding...
Q: Let's Woe some more, let's have some more:
L17: ..(net) the people I knows (laughter)...oh the children in
the Yorkshire scene...
1,10: Yes the children...
1,17: the fact that it was sex education and people would not
actually have sex in a public school like that to actually
illustrate the sex...tke birds and the bees, would they
Qs When do you think the exaggeration works as comedy?...think
about some of those, I mean, if the exploding Mr Creosote is
exaggeration and it doesn't work for you, whereas something
like let's say that sexeducation or 'Every Sperm is Sacred'
...exaggerated numbers of kids...
1,17: There's a small leap for my imagination, you know to make;
well, not so much the number of kids, obviously, but the...
in the sexeducation one,..(?)...it's the next step, you
know,..some of the jokes come from, whereas the exploding
man...I don't know...
Qs Is it something to do with the amount of exaggeration?..do
you think?
L17: It varies from sketch to sketch
L10: It's a difficult one; like...yes...for example the bit that
sticks in my mind is when they cut the baby's umbilical cord,
and this is exaggeration, right, but it was so...quick and
sharp...it was exaggerated, but it wasn't overexaggerated,
it wasn't extended, like everexaggeration, he could have done
it ten times, perhaps, but it was so quick you could almost
have missed it, but it was an exaggeration and it worked..,
that was a good example of exaggeration working...and not
going any further.
And then, exaggeration not working...
L17: Exaggeration working, where it worked very well, was the
sketch in the Zulu wars, where the officers are (?) about
their own things, pursuing their own interests, when there's
a war raging round about...(?) from other films, that is the
impression that you get, is the men do the fighting, the
officers who give the commands, I found that easy to sort of.,
I think it was the exaggeration that made me laugh...
1 think yes, I mean that's where exaggeration and under-
statement sort of come together...I mean understatement is
exaggeration in the opposite direction isn't it...having
your leg bitten off and	 'It's just a soratch"...(laughter)
L10: Imean the rugby match was an example of exaggeration too...
L17: I didn't find it funny.
Q: You didn't.
LI7: No
L10: That's interesting, Ithink you'd have had to have gone to
public school to find that really funny...perhaps, or you'd
have had to play rugby...as a kid...
Q: res. Yes...when you saY you didn't find it funny...
L17: Because I just thought it would be fairly obvious that the
masters were from...an idea that was a comedy I don't know,
I just thought that it was so obvious that the masters would
cheat and trample the boys.-..
Q: But it's not, visually seeing it doesn't there's a differencr.
between knowing that it's sort of happening...
L17: Bo, I didn't find it at all...funny...because it was just,
for mn...it could probably just have been the sane shot
repeated of him getting the ball over the line...in fact I
would probably have found it funnier if they'd Just kept
showing the same shot ..(?)...
Q: Let's see if there's anything else on my list...
Yes...I mea...what	 why do you think some people
actually do respond to Monty Python ..films much more than
other groups of people, what do younthink makes the difference
I mean if you had to put people into two groups...
L17: You mean why do people vote labour and why some people vote
tory...
Q: Tes but even with that question you could come up with some
pointers, couldn't you...
L17: Yes, you can, yes
L10: I always had a, I don't know, 1 always had a feeling that
Monty Python was somehow split into two camps, those people
who were somehow very repressed, and were, kind of enjoyed
seeing what was repressed acted out, and those people who,
at the other end of the scale, who somehow lived and talked
about Monty Python anyway, also enjoyed it, who weren't
necessarily repressed, and so 0*...
Q: well the pleasures are...different...what sorts of pleasures
do you think are going on?
L10: umm...i* some ways I suppose seeing yourself, or seeing...
Q: What would you think...
L17: I just don't know...I would just..it wouldn't hold for now,
but I remember when it was originally on, and people at
school, it was very much a oneupmanship, it wouldn't have
mattered what was on, because it was quite a battle to get
your parents to let you to watch it in the first place, and
I suppose it's because it was so different from anything,
any other comedy that was on, at the time...if you weren't
able to act it out in the playground next day, (?) one of
the (?)..
L10: Yes, yes, that's true".
Q: Yes, but them, so you think it's the novelty, but I mean
perhaps that doesn't help because there are plenty of 0;
programmes that are on that...
L17: No, I know, it's not...
L10: I think, I think that's the right word, I think a lot of
Monty Python was novelty...
L17: ...definitely, at the time...
L10:...at the time, which is like what I said earlier, why it
appears so dated now...
11 17: Mainly the animation, you know 1hatt*witsw6.I don't remember
seeing any animation like that before...and the opening as
well, which is why my father didn't like to watch it, what
was it, the man, the nude man playing the piano, you didn't
sort of tend to get that on the BBC...
L10: ...ripkt, riftt...BBO2 it was as well, wasn't it...
Qs Yes...it's interesting because I was talking to somebody
yester...somebody else yesterday...who said he hadn't seem
it when it first came out...really at all...the series, yes,
the original series, and then he saw it about three or four
weeks ago, this repeat series, and he was rolling around on
the floor...
L10: ...really?
g: I mean he...his words were, tho.te felt, although he hadn't
really seen it when it was out,Ir hadn't visawlsamy dated...
L40: That's very intersting...
Q: That's what I thought, I thought, most people have said to
me, and I have kind of the feeling as well that it...some of
it is... the pleasure I get Prom it now is more of recognitio,
something familiar...
L10: But / watched it with my, like the four flatpeople of my
house last week when it was on, and we all turned it offs
because we couldn't watch it...yes, it was just like (?)...
I'm sure it was funny at least ten years ago...
L17: Yes, the film that was on Christmas New Year time, I tried
to watch that and...although again the familiarity, thinking
about the parrot sketch, the dead parrot sketch...but I just..
I just thought oh ne...I mean we were watching it on a small
black and white TV, that's not ideal...but I expecte& to
enjoy it far more than I actually did...some of it just
seemed to have no structure at all, you just felt when they
were writing it that you just didn't really know what they
were getting at...they were deliberately trying to baffle
you...
Qs well yes, but I mean that's the thing, at the time...
L17: ...obviously at the time it was so different...
Q: it was so different, that's why it worked so vell...whereas
now It's fairly commonplace for programmes to be doing this...
L10: Right	 but in some ways I don't think 1 ever found Fawlty
T...Konty Python that funny,..I just said Fawlty Towers
because I was going to say, I found Fawlty Towers very funny,
and I still do...1 can still watch it again and again, and
find it so funny that it hurts	 but I've never had that
with Monty Python...
Q: ...and the reason for that...
L10: Well presumably John eleese, the material and the timing...
0...I think the timing and the acting...something about it...
L70: ..and also because it's so sustained...Monty Python, that
was my main criticism if this was that, you know something
gets going, and it gets moving, and then it jumps, or it
stops completely, or there's a	 animation...
Tes...I guess.., the fact that it was episodic like that;
I mean if...if it wadtatinpletely surreal, like the original
television programmes, maybe it'd have a chance of working
in a different way...you get a different pleasure from it
just leaping around in	 completely unexpected directions
but here you 800/1 get used to the idea that it's episodes,
coming one after the other...
L10: Right...right 000
Qs Let's see...do you think the fact that you were part of an
experiment had any effect on your appreciation...
L17: For me, only that I kept thinking, an I enjoying this one
more or less than the other one that I think I'll probably
give the same mark to...that was
L10: For me, only insofar as I kept asking myself, is this funny?
 ..that it was interesting to see the difference between 'is
this funny?' and 'is this amusing' or entertaining...
L17: You tend to do that anyway, when you're watching comedy Tr...
100: Yes...*ell I think I only notice if something's really funny
when something is suddenly very funny...because so much of
the time comedy isn't actuall y all that funny OR television...
and then when something is very funny you suddenly...(?)...
very clever comedy...
Q: Do either of you watch much, say, situation comedy?
L10: No...not really...I mean the last thing I watched was
Q: Do you watch much?
L17: I try and...I watch more of...sort of things, like that...
but not actually sitcoms, very much at all; I saw the first
episode of that...pretty idiotio...a review of it...set in
a cafe run by a gay guY...and I couldn't believe how bad it
was: I don't think I've ever seen, although I don't regularly
watch sitcoms so I can't tell, but for me it was on a par,
an episode I saw of one, it was set in a leftwing borough,
Q: Ab...what was that called...something'Citizen smith'?
L17: No...no, 'Citizen smith, was that not the one, with the guy,
mean I found that very funny, with Robert Lindsey, but this
is one, I can't remember, this guy that went on to be in
or about the same time as one of those Indian things...this
guy turned out to be homosexual and I can't remember, he's
got a hyphenated name, Tim...Tim PiggottSmith It was awful,
they sort of say, we're going to set up a immunity for you
know, onelegged black lesbians, and there*s all this canned
laughter going 'ha ha ha'...it's having experiences like that
I tend not even to give, give things a chance, I see a
trailer for, I've seen sort of like a trailer of two minutes
of Duty Free and I think well I'm never ever going to watch
Q: ...I'm exactly the same, actually...
LiO: It's funny, mostly if I watch comedy programmes it's because
somebody has recommended it..,I won't just turn it on...
Q: Or else if you've read about it perhaps, I mean, in something
that,you sort of feel, oh, somebody's found out some...I mean
I was reading this book called 'Family Television' by David
Morley, where he's done some research in London about how
people watch television; when, how, how decisions are taken
and.. .what they're doing at the same time as they're watching,
these things.-..and under sitcom, virtually, most of the
people, most of the sample, one sitcom most of them watch are,
is...I've for gotten what it is:. (?)..,.,... Only Fools and Nersea.
L17: I wouldn't, if I saw that I would do it more by the writer,
watch,-,6 something by 2ohn Sullivan, I'd watch sometbing,
I'd give a try with something by Carla Lame...
L10: But as I...I think I'm...your other question, actually I
often find things which aren't supposed to be necessarily
funny funnier than the otedies, like Dallas I find incredibly
funny...but I'm not sure that it's meant to be...and also
Hill Street Blues...there are moments in that which I fine
actually a lot better than a whole halfhour of readymade
comedy...
Q: ...which also brings us, brings us back to the definition of
comedy and pleasure...there must be a sort of overlap...
mixed with other pleasures...
L10: right.. .right.
Q: Because a thought that crossed my mind on several occasions
was that mean The Meaning of Life, 'mean I've always assumed
it is a comedy, but then there is running through it this
kind of 'critique' of certain assumptions, of certain kinds
of, you know, social behaviours, institutions, assumptions
of what's...heterosexual, sex education, and everything...
in a way, you know there's a strand running through it which
is...which is relatively serious as well.
L10: It's quite scathing, actually...and also it's quite,..quite
angry...
Q: Tes t i mean I suppose that's one of the reasons I personally
like the opening song as well...
L10: ...the corporate tekeover...the insurance...
Q: No I mean the opening song, of the actual main film, the
theme, well, title song...
L17: The same as they have at the end...
Q: Yes the title song...
L17: I didn't notice, remember that was at the beginning as well...
Q: No, no...the one at the end is the, is the liver donor.. song
whereas at the beginning, you've got the sort of title song...
the whole thing...
L17: What is it?
L10: I missed out on that as well (laughter) How come I didn't...
L17: Sing it:
(Q: brief attempt to render start of song; the beginning of
HAP Section 2 was then replayed on the tape; comments during
this were mostly inaudible)
Q: Right,well, that's all really that I wanted to raise, we've
covered all the points I had in mind, so unless there's
anything else you want to...
L17: 1 just thought I'd better say that I've indicated that I was
in pain at the end and not at the beginning, but it was
nothing at all to do with the film, just the wine triggered
my hiatus hernia, but I don't think it affected my viewing
because I've been in incredible stomach pain befbre and still
thoroughly enjoyed things, (laughter) maybe half a point up
for each thing, that's all...just in case you looked and you
thought, whatl
Q: Yes...thanks for telling me:
L10: There' s a strange... strange answer here:
Q: Because...I mean I... I haven't looked at, the only one I've
looked at was the very first one that a friend did, a friend
over from Germany filled this in for me a gO)a dummy run, and
I looked through her' s, and I thought, God this is great,
you know there were not that many changes, but I mean out
of the hundred words maybe fifteen or so had changed, and a
lot of them were words to do with anxiety, being relaxed,
she was less relaxed, she was more anxious...all those things
tended to correlate, I thought, God: It worked:...for that
particular subject it seems to have...but the thing to do
will be to look at whether that is reproduced across any
kind of range, whether you get some people who systematically
feel more anxious, or less anxious, or whether there are any...
L17: Plus I suppose, it'd be different as well if people, well
you can't really do it for thi film, probably, but in a
normal sort of undemanding feature film, if people came
straight from work, sort of all tensed up, the film might
give them the chance to wind down whereas you're doing this
on Saturdays, aren't you, and people might already feel
relaxed...to get here at half past six is a dalk, straight
from works but it' s not the kind of film that you say, you
expect people to be more relaxed after anyway...
Q: But that' s very true, that the circumstances, you know, when
somebody walks in, there are other reasons for being more or
less relaxed other than just the film, that' s right...
L10: That' s... yes, I was thinking, too, if I had just come in and
sat here and we' d talked for two hours
Qs I guess what we
do is have a leaving session, just to
make sure everybody's equally...' CO I mean that's one of
the things that some of the research that people did with
these Mood Adjective Check Lists, when they were developing
them a few years ago, was that they did controls, they
actually did the work the other way round, to actually work
out how these Mood Adjective Check Lists worked, they used
certain types of films, which they assumed had certain
effects, so they were doing it the other way round...as a
control, they used to show...what they reckoned was a really
boring film...I'm suspicious of that, you, know, something
like 'Farming in Iowa' or something like that, something
with just cows walking around a field, somebody talking
about the size of the fields, stuff like that...but that
has affects on people...make people feel more... maybe irritat
bored or something...Right, thank you very much...
?APE-2: L21 
Q: I've jotted down a few...things that could structure what we
say about it, but I mean...1 can't, I haven't looked at the
questionnaire but I mean, you would say you like Monty
Python's stuff, would you...
L21: Y e s. .. ye s...I wouldn't say it's their best film; probably
Life of Brian I would say was about their best...
Q: Yes...so what is is you particularly like about the other
stuff?
L21: Can't remember what I put in the questionnaire:
Q: Yes but that doesn't matter...
L21: I thought about, I actually sat down and thought, why I like
Monty Python...I'm a bit drowsy at the moment, can't actually
think about...they seem to attack social convention * and they
break the taboos that society sort of sets up...the watithat
they do it is funny, also the way that anything can happen,
one minute you'll have one scene, the next minute something
completely...
Q:	 different
L21: completely different or out of the ordinary...also the way
scenes continue on from each other, one scone's completely
different to the other, ta g s on with some sort of connecting
piece...the actors are Oita good, I wouldn'd say, a lot of
people think John Cleese is pretty good, I don't think he's
that funny; Michael Palma I think is pretty funny...and Eric
Idle I think is pretty good. It's basically the ideas they
put into it as well...
Q: What...in what way would you say then that if you don't think
Alanins of Lift is as good as some of the other things, what
is it, in what ways does it fall short of the rest?
L21: It/scertainly is original as their other pieces...there's
obviously a lot of idea and work has been put into it...but...
I don't know...it t s just...there just isn't the sense of...
of the comedy that was present in the other films, I can't
really sort of centre onto anything.the Life of Brian as
and I'm not particularly...towards religion, I don't
Particularly believe in religion, and the way that they
attacked i*-in Life of prian I thought was particularly
funny...
Q: I mean...so, thinking about the questionnaire, is it likely
that you might have ticked first...I can't remember the
words on the questionnaire but sort of you know like 'attack
on convention' or something like that...
L21: Possibly
Q: ...you might have put that first then, yes...because	 another
question would be, do you see a difference between finding
something funny, between you know, comedy, finding something
funny, something amusing, and other kinds of pleasure?...
liking films for other reasons...I mean, 'cos that's something
that puzzles me that, you know is there a big difference
between the two...there seems to be a sort of blurrinr
a film that isn't comedy...
Q: Well, not only that, but even in a comedy film, I mean what
is it that...that one actually enjoys about comedy...
L21: If I was to make a list of say my top ten films, there
wouldn't be a comedy filin there...comedy is good for a
brief moment of relief, of light entertainment; usually when
you watch a comedy film for a second time, (I'm) aware what's
happening, it's not as funny...Life of Brian would probably
be an exception, Time Bandits probably another exception...
but...it's, because you're expecting the joke and as you're
aware of the ending to it, and the way it's presented, it's
not as funny...usually comedy is not so artistic as other
formsof film, which, for me, watching a film more than once
is for it's artistic quality, which is usually lacking in a
comedy film; the jokes would probably be the only artistic
quality in the film, and as I said hearing a joke the second
time, the artistic quality is lost.
Q: I mean, yes, the word 'joke', so what do you think of as
'jokes' in a film, I mean talking about Meaning of Life..,
what do you understand by 'jokes' in a film like that?
L21: Um...difficult...there wasn't really that much I would have...
I imagined it to be funny when I first saw it, but seeing it
this time there wasn't really that much I would say was
exceptionally funny...possibly the last sketch*...the one
with the fat man at the table, basically because it's au
attack on the posh people, how the...the way thatcthey
isolate themselves from the fat person eating at the table,
and also the...it's a bit crude, but the way that he's being
sick, is...you don't usually see that in a film, it's
ori ginal...funny way of being original, but it's a...you
don't usually see it to that extent being portrayed in a
film...
Q: ..that's right, yes...What I was, one of the things I was
getting at about pleasure is, I mean, where it mixes with
comedy is, as you said, you like Michael Palin and Eric Idle
in particular, so if you were watching something with them
in, whether it's Life of Brian or Meaning of Life, presumably
I mean, how did you fee' about seeing them in Meaning of Life?
L21: Erie Idle I don't think was that good in this one, we didn't
see that much of him; Michael Palin I thought was good, his
facial expressions and hiss j ust complete overacting. I
think John Cleese, there's a touch of seriousness sometime&
in his acting which tends to destroy the sort of zany bit...
don't know whether that answered the...question or not...
Q: Yes, well, what I'm trying to get at is...sort of...as you
said, it's good, it's what makes it funny as well, isn't it..,
you know, if you like watching Michael Palin, then it adds
to it being funny
L21: ...you take the scene where they're doing the marching in
the square, it's Michael Palin's facial expressions I think,
in that, and the way that he just bellows , bellows his
voice out, that actually I think makes that scene...there's
nothing else but Michael Palin in thatscene...
Q: That's right, yes...so that's what I'm sort of in a sense
trying top one of the things I'm trying to untangle is sort
of, thevfact that there might be a joke, I mean in some
cases there'll be a joke even, that one can laugh at, in
other cases there's...a performance, which is funny...
L21: Yes...mainly, in a comedy film I wouldn't sa y so much a joke,
it's more visual, in a film; if you, don't know, watch
something like Saturday Live, which you're probably aware
of, then that's when I would say, more the actual spoken
joke would be more funny, but in a film I'd say 99% it's
more visual...it wouldn't really be a film if it was just
...bloke reading off jokes here and there...unless you would
sort of...I suppose the Marx Brothers, that's where more, the
spoken joke I think is more appreciated.
Q: Don't you think, I'm just, to take that further, don't you
think there are things within...I'm just trying to think of
an example which I haven't...done...before; say the live organ
* L21 was the respondent with whom there was insufficient time
in which to view the entire film.(cf Fig.1 above)
Q: 'I'm using it', yes...
L21 Yes...there I think that was the only thing that was funny
transplants one, when for instance John Cleese turns round
and says *I thought she'd never ask'...just a line like that
could be taken as a joke line, or don't you think so?
L21: I didn't find that funny at all I think the basic, for that
actual scene I think there was the basic concept for that...
they could possibly come along and take sour organs while
you're alive, and the actual, the way that, when he answered,
the person answered the door and he said, well, it's
inconvenient, busy...
in that scene...
Q: I'll think of anotheroexamplet Umm...in the school, there
would be points like...like the bloke who has the...the
boardduster chucked at him, an example of...
L21: ...if you think about lines, I slppose one that will probably
be more vivid would probably be 'Fighting each other', when
there's, they're being killed off one by one, and he's asking
them to go and get	 things, andthat's where the actual
spoken joke I think was more funny, although the presenting
of the clocks, the visual joke, was also funny as well...
Q: Yes...that, I mean, we could talk about something else as
well, but 1 mean, that does puzzle me, the sort of,there's
the sort of, obviously a standup j oke, which you don't find
in these sorts of films, but there are...in what...what do
certain lines in this kind of film have in common with stand-
up jokes, you know, in the sense one is still watching and
listening, and tAere's a kind of line that comes across
which...which would be funny 0 00 which has something like the
same structure, it's a gag, a sort of verbal gag...
Which...actually, before looking at that, 	 mean, which
do you find, which did you find funnier, the material dealing
with sex, the first section, or sort of mutilation of the
body material?...fighting each other and the sort of leg
chopped off...
L21: Out of all the scenes it would probably be the 'Autumn Years's
the last one...the seine with sex, it was, the use of actual
language was a bit heavyhanded, a bit explicit, to make
the actual sort of, the actual sex sort of um comic ...it
was too sort of serious...the one with the organs, I imagined
it as being quite funny, but seeing it this time I suppose
I, my expectations made it slightly more serious, and
Particularly the bits where he's actually holding the organs
in his hand and he's trying to cut...(?) I found a bit
repulsive...
Q: But what, so turning that the other way round, can you
mean, you're trying to accunt for why you might have found
it, or you remember finding it funnier the first time...why
do you think that was? You just said why you didn't find it
so funny this time, but why would you have found it funny the
first time...
L21: I don't know whether...turnit (?)...I saw this on video
directly after seeing Dawn of the Dead, which might have an
effect on my reactions towards that scene...'cos that Was a
horror, sort of black comedy, horror comic, and I, it's
just...sometimes, well I watch a lot of horror films, sort
of, about ten times more than any other type of film, and
it's just the actual, it's different to the horror film I'd
usually see,you know, when I see it, it'll be serious,
someoneaetually being murdered by a killer or something...
and it's justthe waythat they come, these two medics come in
with ease, it's just something natural to them...the way
that they're just taking the organs out, I suppose the first
time I would have thought was funny...and the actual sort of
...this is expanding a little bit more  his life is consider&
insignificant,..
Q; What about your own feelings...I mean on a kind of visceral
level, your own kind of reaction to seeing...I suppose
you've already answered this question but...to actually
seeing the liver being lifted out * the body being...being
mangled...
L21: As...a mean I'm quite hardened to something like that...I did
say 'repulsive' a couple of minutes earlier, but I wasn't
repulsed...to turn away or be violently ill or something...
but that's probably from seeing so many horror films, you
sort of become punch drunk to them...
Q: ...but you didn't find it funny...this time round...
L21: No...I did find it watchable and comic in the sirt of context
of the rest of the film'w but I wasn't sort of wheeling about
in laughter...but I wasn't with the rest of the film anyway,
so...
Q: Can you say...say anything about...I mean did you see Melanin&
of Life on your own?...the first time...
L21: No I saw it with a friend...
Q: What was the friend's, sort of reaction...I'm just also sort
of...what were your impressions of other peoples' reactions...
L21: We both liked Monty Python when we hired it on video, and I
think after watching the film we both felt disappointed, we
expected more from the film; in the vein of Monty Python
this seemed to have been a bit of a letdown, from what
they'd done in the past...
Q: Yes, umm...yes, but in particular, how do you think other
people, what are your perceptions of the way other people
sort of react to the...sort of bodily violence...
L21: You see he was a bit like me, he revelled in horror films,
so...if anything he was slightly more sadistic in his...
watching material, so he t s...if I remember, he's sort of
revelling in the amount of violence being shown
Q: Because what I'm after is the fact that some people will be
more anxious about certain material; whether that anxiety
makes them sort of such themselves off from it completely,
and not want to have anything to do with it, or whether
they'll, it'll sort of...they might actually find it funny
because of that.
L21: I don't think for a majority of the real audience, particular:
if they're not a Monty Python fan, 'cos a Monty Python, even
if they're repulsed by imagery like that, in other films,
will probably appreciate it, because they know what to expect
from Mont7 Python material, but for a general, well for a
majorityrof the audience, and for someone who doesn't
appreciate Monty Python to a snerL4n extent, I mean, they
would actually have shut themselves off from that scene...
on video they might not have continued with the material,
possibly...
Q: ...so what	 another question which I had jotted down, Yee,
what sort of, what do you think makes a Monty Python fan?
 ..or the sort of person who likes watching Monty python
type films...
L21: It'd be typecasting myself as a certain person...
Q: Well, yes, what
L21: t cos whatever I say, in generalising as a Monty python fan,
I would have to be careful that, that...it's the opposite
to me...I try...'cos I wouldn't class myself as a Monty
Python IAA, but what I would class as a typical Monty Python
fan, I would see as being different to myself...if you're
aware of what I'm trying to say
Q: Yes...
L21: ...yes, the typical Monty Python fan...is...he would enjoy
sort of alternative humour, which has been, which is a sort
of label term...possibly rebellious against society...
possibly someone who...who has restricted themselves,
restricted their emotions, and can find outlets through
the kind of humour that Monty Python depicts...
Q: What do you mean by 'restricted their emotions'?
L21: Umm	 I know what I want to say but I can't say it: Someone
who's a bit of a recluse, I would have thought, someone who
can't share their emotions with groups of people, with
people around them...someone who might feel slightly
depressive but can find relief...(?) someone that feels
depressive in society, and shows a zany and s more sort of
less serious view to life...
Q:That's interesting...what...do you have...where does that
idea come from? I mean...interesting idea...
L21 I don't know...something off the top of my head: It's
something I wouldn't change..,I have my idea that most
people who like alternative humour would come under that
sort of barrier...although there are other forms of sort of
alternative humour, the more sort of sexual type of jokes...
which aren't really that sort of significant in Monty Python
films, although it did crop up quite a bit in here...they
would probgbly take in more of the sort of the sort of crude
vulgar type of person of society, the person who enjoys sort
of sexual jokes...
Q: ...which you feel Monty Python, that isn't...
L21: ..that isn't such a major factor, no.
Q: What else, I think that's very interesting, what sort of,
what about other forms of comedy, then things like situation
comedy on television...do you watch sitcom?...much
L21: Sometimes...Only Fools and Horses...Dear John...that's the
same writing partnership...Alf Garnett, possibly...around
those sort of lines
Q: What are your reasons, when you watch, vat sort of
L21: Just,they seem to be generally more humorous than the average
comedy programme...
Q: So I mean you select...
L21: Yes...o lot of... a lot of the comedy programmes	 there's
one called Duty Free, which I just absolutely detedt..,it
just doesn't seem tobe funny, it's more interestiZg in a
narrative rather than humour...something like Only Fools and 
Aorgel, there's a lot of oneline sort of gags, 8 lot of
verbal jokes, there's also visual humour, and it's ...a lot
of the suenes you can see building up before they actually
occur	 and also, like Monty Python, the unexpected quite
often happens. Dear Jahn I suppose you could include under
'attack on society'.
Q: But in...but in general I mean you obviously see the function
of...of sitcom in general...very general terms to be quite
different from...say Monty Python...
L21: Yes, I would...and for the majority of sitcom, I wouldn't
watch it...I don't find them that funny.
Q: and what, why would most people be watching them...or what
types of people...
L21: ...people who've got nothing else to do (laughs) ...p eople who
just watch television...because I 'think the majority of
sitcoms, People would not watch them on a regular basis, they
wouldn't go out of their w#y to watch them, if therre
watching television, and it's on, and it looks interesting,
they would watch them...Only Mools and Horses, I know from
the response it got from my friends and from round school,
has more of a cult following, and I and also people at school
actually went out of their way to watch virtually every
episode
Q: I was going to say that I've just been reading a book on...
on television, and the family, and David Norley's done lots
of interviews with families in London and that came across,
virtually everyone was saying you know that if they watched
sitcoms they watched that...there's a lot of comments about
the fact that it's based in the East End and everything, and
a lot of people say they recognize certain types of character
and they...you know, that's one of the main pleasures of
watching...
L21: ...that's the other thing about Only Fools and Horses, the
characters, they're so sort of easily identiffkable...the...
there's a really sort of dull and stupid one, I can't
remember his name, the tall one...
Q: ...I don't know, I don't watch it...
L21: ...and he really, he's just so sort of dense, he's so easy
to sort of identify with...(people?) really get fed up
with.., just hasn't got the (brain?)...
Q: Whereas clearly Monty Python is in a completely different
area.
L21: Yes...you can still identify with some of the imagery they're
putting across...like the Saxon society...the Life of Brian,
the way that they attack the whole, the whole concept of sort
of the birth of Christ...I don't know if it's the right word
saying 'identify' but ...I can relate to the way that they're
attacking...
Q: Yes... I think it's a different sort of identification...
L21: ...yes... it is, definitely...I mean, you definitely don't
identify with the characters because in the majority of the
films they don't bother to build up character...characters
are secondary to the sort of comedy...
Q: Yes...let's have a look at what I've got written down...if
there's anything important I've forgotten...Yes I mean
something that you've already touched on, you actually said
that in the first parts of the film, something you didn't
appreciate that much, the fact that the...the sort of sexual
stuff was a bit as you said crude...I was going to ask, under
what...do you think that sometimes 'smut' or, you know,
without being necessarily in a joke format, could be funny.,
L21: I don't get what you
Q: Well just the fact of seeing somebody's bum or whatever, or
somebody, or the fact that they're talking about...sex...
L21: It depends on the way that the material's being exploited;
a pornographic film wouldn't be, I wouldn't see as funny...
definitely wouldn't be funny: Possibly the more sort of, the
films that have occured in the last two or three years, the
more sort of teenage type of. exploitation of skin, or
however you want to call it_ .  depending on how it's put
across is funny but I still wouldn't see it because it's
usually...OK you could say Monty Python's pathetic humour,
but at least it has a reason behind it, or I see that there's
a reason behind it; with those sort of teenage films, the
only reasoning is to exploit male and female genitalia or
whatever,..
Q: Yes, OK that's the point, that's the point I'm making...in
a wa y, I'm aiming at two levels, one is yourself, and what
you perceive other people doing as well, that there does
seem to be a point at which just showing genitals or just
be funny...under some circumstances...
L21: Depends on the individual, though, I think
Q: You don't find it works that way for you...
L213 No. There's	 again, you could also say, it depends who
you're actually viewing the material with, if you're
viewing it in a group of, don't know, half a dozen male
people, I mean possibly you can see the material different.
Q: That's right...I think that I mean...even a situation like
this, the fact that there's just you and me watching it in
this way is quite different; I mean if...in another session
there might be half a dozen people interacting a bit more
and so on, then you might get different sorts of response...
What impression do you get...just sort of...if you've
got a particular sort of problem or strong feeling about
something, would you say that it increases the chances Of
finding something funny or decreases them...I mean, if you
feel strongly about the particular issue which is being...
L21; If you've...if you're sort of...experiencing a death in the
family, certain things relating to death I'd think wouldn't
be perceived as so funny...'cos I've experienced...I've
actually got a grandparent who's..not got long to live...at
the moment, but I've also had one who's died recently, and
there was that bit at the beginning of Monty Python, where
they had the funeral procession; I didn't find that
particularly funny; possibly in a more sort of relaxed way
towards death that may have been perceived as more funny.
But that's just generalising the idea...giving an example.
I wouldn't say that'Im actually responding that way; I
didn't actually respond that way at the beginning but I'm
just citing an example of how someone may actually be in a
position while viewing that material...
(13 Oh well yes, but there's an important ditinction..,I mean as
You say,- you've given an example of how somebody might, but
you've just said that you didn't find it particularly funny.,
L21: No but I don't think that's for the reasons of what I'm
experiencing at the moment...
Qs You don't think it's for those reasons...
1. 21: ...no...
Qs ..because that's really what I'm getting at...
L27: because I...I said, I've seen the film before, I knew what
was coming, and also I'm slightly more hardened to the
material, the more provocative material.
Q: Yes...because there are two sort of conflicting sets of
research or...they don't necessarily conflict but they seem
to anyway, one group saying that clearly those sorts of
anxieties, if you like, can inhibit finding something
amusing; on the other hand, If one has that anxiety, it
can actually be a release...to get rid of that anxiety...
L21: yes...but in the past I don't think I've ever experienced
that, I'm more sort of repulsed by the imagery ...I feel it
could be my insecurity, or...(?0...but I feel it's more
attacking me, rather than attacking society or whatever,
wanting to attack whatever it's presenting...
Qs Yes...Ican see that...there's an example of ...a sketch on
one of the television programmes called the Undertaker sketch,
I don't know if you saw that...
L21: ...I've heard of it...
Qs ...where, it was Iverry Jones and Michael Pa...I can't, I
can't remember who actually wrote the Undertaker sketch, but
then, I think Terry Jones it was whose parents were very
or mother was very ill or something like that, and sort
of felt God, we can't do this...but he actually changed his
mind and said well...this is...that's not a good enough
reason...but I mean that's from his point of view as one of
the writers, you know...
Yes, ah yes...
L21: ..just thinking about, expanding on what you just said, if
the writer sometimes, you know writing the material, could
be a release for something that he's experienced, possibly..
Q: Yes and that extends...
L21: ...a sort of emotional release...coming to terms with reality
and actually and making fun of something that they've been
depressed by...
Q: Yes I'm sure that's right, and that's not only for comedy.
it works for comedy, but probably in other ways for other
types of writing as well...
How do you feel about things like sort of exaggeration?
L21: ...in Monty Python.
Q s ..in general...
L21: I don't mind, if anything, Ithink it usually enhances the
joke, as long as it doesn't go completely over the to p and
kills the joke...as you saw in the 'Autumn Years' extract,
you can't get more exaggerated than that, and I found that,
because it was exaggerated it was funny...
Qs ...are there any other examples...
L21: Rhere's the exaggeration of participation in war...the bit
where they're all in the trenches...that's a gross exagge
well, most f the filmwas a gross exaggeration...
Q: Yes, that's right, in a sense you could say most of it is,
but I mean, the thing that interests me in particular is the
relation between exaggeration and understatement, because I
mean they are...sort of two ends of the same, two, see what
I mean exaggeration is 'too much'...
L21: If you're understating something, surely the joke's not
working.
Q: Well, what I mean by it, I mean, I don't think so, because
what I mean by understatement is something like Eric Idle
lying in bed, you know in the Zulu war, and having his leg
bitten off, and then not reacting to it, you know treating
it like...
1,21: I would have said that was exaggeration
Q: Yes, that's what I'm getting at, I mean ball that under-
statement, but I can see that it's...
L21: I'd have said that it's exaggeration of the position of the
officers and the sort of perks that they receive...well,
actually relating to him not reacting to the leg was just...
possibly underitating but I would have seen it as exaggeration.
Q: Yes...I saw it as a combination of the two, that it's an
understatement of..reaction, you know, of sort of well, leg
bitten off and. 'Oh, it's just a scratch', and then saying
that it's a mosquito, I mean it seems to be a nice play on
sott of understatement and exaggeration together...
Right I teem I've gone thr...I think I've covered most
of the areas I thought I wanted to get in...anything else
you can think of? Yes I mean you said that you liked in
Monty Python the sort of fact, the way things can go from
one thing to another very easily, and you don't know what's
coming next...
L21: That destroys the conventional narrative, which usually
overkills the joke because in a film you're just, you've got
the, you're plodding through the plot and are waiting for
jokes to so*t of appear every now and then...at least in the
Monty Python you can stop something straight away and start
again with a complete new idea without sort of complaining
that you've destroyed the narrative.
Q: That's right, yes...but as you say that works more for the
television stuff than for, to some extent, I think more for
Life of Brian and Holy Grail, they tend to have bits and
pieces woven into them...
L21: ...(?)...one of the really funny bits was in kile of Brika,
he jumps off the building and lands in a spaceship, that is
completely unexpected, and it allows for then to creep in a
couple of jokes about being caught in a spaceship in the
middle of an intergalactic war or something...
Q: ...although to some extent I saw that as an excuse as well to
put in a bit of animation...not an excuse, but it's a, it's a
place to put some animation. Just , as in this film you've got
a bit of animation in the.,
L21: ...fish...
Q: ...fish, and also the song, it's not exactly animation, but
there's, sort of this graphics...Have you seen, have you
heard, this is going back to something else, different, have
you heard the Derek and Clive tapes?
iNcvst-,,t
L21: Umm.on and off, / arripT actually sat down...
Q: ...you've heard some...
121: Yes..
Q: What...how do you respond to it?
L21: I think they're funny, but not as funny as Monty Python...
there's a	 may be stretching a bit, there's, they're the
sketches with the two tramps...is there two tramps, or
Q: yyes...well,
121: they...they wear long coats and the flat caps...and they
usually sit in a pub...
Q: YeS but hang on...yes, but wait a minute, no...that's the
Dud...originally there were the Dud and Pete sketches on
Akt_aniz.1311:Las. 1.2., and then Peter Cook and Dudley Moore made
some sound, you know just audio tapes, Derek and Clive...
12I: Yes, I've heard bits of them but I wouldn't sort of...quote
stuff from it...not too freely anyway...
Q: You know they are...
Qs ...Particularly gross extension of the Dud and Pete stuff,
and I actually did toy with the idea of...of using that, to
some extent, this kind of...tn go into this idea of 'smut'
as well, and just using some of the 	 really goes over the
top with...with obscenity and...things which might offend
people and how far can one go and still find something funny.
Oh yes, that's something else...:there is something I'd
forgotten...there's a few jokes in...or a few, few moments
in MeaninR of Life which could be sort of offensive...
L21: Everything that's comic could be perceived as offensive...
Qs Yes all right...I'll rephrase that...particular moments
which could be offensive to women or to, there are a couple
of sort of potentially...they flirt with racism a couple of
times, not so much in this, but in, you know in Life of Brian 
there's the stuff about...
121: (?)
Q: Yee, but Imean the racism in particular A in Life of Brian is
there's a Palestinian liberation organization
121: They attack Jewish people...as well...which they did in that
as well...
Q: ...in the next sketcht..there's a...well you see, this is
the point, 'attack'...
121: Yes...well I wouldn't say attack, I wouldn't perceive it as
an attack...whereas...someone who's really...really strict
Jewish would probably Perceive it as an attack...this is
attacking their morals and their actual way of life...they
would see thetselves being placed in the position as a sort
of a symbol or metaphor, the actual Jewish person being
presented, and actually see themselves being attacked rather
than the actual image ibntthe screen being attacked...if
'attack's the right word:
Q: But do yon...yes, I realize that's one of the things, yes...
: ...they are funny...
* of note pg.36 above
...but would you say that's...a sort of inverted commas
'correct' position to take, or would you say that they were
missing the point or whatever...
L2I: Depends on the individual...for myself I don't really care
what actually gets shown on the screen...it's only a film...
and I don't think you should really take material that
seriously...
Q: ..but to some extent I mean one could say that most of
most of us: ..shouldn't say most of us, but a lot of us are
in aposition where we're not very likely to be in a position
to be attacked... 1 0os I think there are a few moments in
Meaning of Life where I think women can feel quite...in a
sense it'll be interesting to talk to some women respondents
about that...Imean the animation bit, when they're out
walking in the stars...
L21: you've got the bit in the hospital...the beginning...a couple
of womeniMight fee]) disturbed by the...the way 	 at she's
just taken for granted and not given any...special attention..
Q: Yes...in a sense I mean, I'd distiguish between those differex
things, I mean in that scene, in that sequence, I mean that's
part, a major part of the point of that sketch, is the fact
that yes, I mean they are making fun of the fact that the
woman in that situation le neglected and so on; but I mean
the...there isn't any such point in for instance the graphics
where you've got the female form being fertilized and then a
sort of shot towards the vagina...
L21 ..but that...but that, anyose who felt disturbed by that
image, I would have thought would have been more towards
the sort of feminist area...
Q: Right, yes...
L21: that they're actually...sort of tread carefully here they're
actually being used rather, not as a person but more for, to
sort of give birth...
Q: Yes, I think that's right, and another moment is when the,
there's a couple of bits towards the end that we didn't see,
oh yes the cleaning woman being vomited all over
L21: If you had a film which say had a male cleaner.,.I wouldn't
I wouldn't sort of pinpoint on the vomiting bit, 'cos I don't
think he's attacking women, he's not vomiting on her because
she's a woman, I wouldn't say that, but in a film which
attacks social convention, you have to show things, I don't
think you have to, but to enhance the comedy, you have to
show things which people actually are aware of, people
perceive as things 'around them in society...the stereotyped
roles; if it was a man being vomited on, in a cleaner's
clothes, it might not be so funny, I'm not saying it's
funny because it's a woman, it might not be so funny because
you're not able to see it as an actual social thing, it's a
bit...if you understand what I'm trying to say; if say like
it was a 50:50 place in society, where there was 50% male
cleaners, 50% female cleaners, then you could actually
decide whether you wanted a male or a female cleaner, but
as it currently stands, the problem with society is that
there's a significant majority of female cleaners, so I
think you have to depict a female cleaner.
Q: Yes, I take\that point, but still I think, some people would
still...would say that the mes...the sort of...I don't like
the word 'message' but yes the kind of messages tha t are
being, or the meanings that are in that kind of image, are
all to do with a woman on her knees and being vomited on, I
mean if one puts it that wa y, it's not a terribly...
L21: She wouldn't bend over...she would have to go on her knees
to clean it up,..a practical way of doing her job.
Q: Yes, yes. I think there's a separation between, I mean
you're looking at it in terms of, Yes there is a little
narrative going on there, and what's sort of realistic
within, in terms of...that_nee
L21: ...but you say that she gets vomiked on...doesn't the waiter
get vomited on? and also you have a waiter who brings a
bucket; if you wanted to expand your theory surely that
would have been a woman who would have brought the bucket
in, and would have got vomited on.
Q: Well I don't have any particular theory but...I think...
L21: I agree with you that there is a...there is a...an unequality
between male and female in society but I don't think...it
depends on what you think but I don't think it's actually
explored or exploited in a film such as a Monty Python film.
Q: No, yes I'll agree with that, because the film isn't...
L21: ...it attacks everything, it doesn't actually say, right,
we're going to attack women in this film.
Q: But I think there's a difference between what a film sets
out to do and what the images end up doing with particular
viewers.
L21: But isn't that depending o# how sort of profeminist you are
or...
Q: It'll have a lot to do with that, but not only, because
there'll be,.. .we're getting off, possibly drifting off a
little bit now, but I mean...a lot of people watching the
film, men or women, with, that image, if one finds it funny
for whatever reason, probably the reason is to do with the
grotesqueness, Creosote vomiting all over the place, I mean
that's the main thing that one's likely to find funny,
rather than the fact that there's this cleaningwoman
the fact that one just l)takes that as being you know there,
and it's funny, reinforces...
L21: Well I didn't,- / didn't actually perceive any attack on a
female, or I didn't also perceive she was on her knees, I
just saw that she was on her knees cleaning; I didn't see
she was on her knees, she was being attacked, vomited on;
if you want to...in comparison, possibly something like
Mildred Pierce, at the end of that, you have those two
ladies there...that is an explicit, it's made obvious that
they're attacking the female role in society...
Q: Well I think that's...
L21: ..it's not put there just to stow two women cleaning the
floor...it's actually put there to sort of show that the
women are trodden down...to things like that, whieh, it's
not being shown in the Monty Python film
Q: That's very true, yes it doesn't have the same role, the
image doesn't have the same function at all, that's right..,
which is not to say, though, that the...which is not to say
that it has no functions It's still there as an imago, and
...yes one can then argue about how valid it is to pick it
up, and sort of say well that image is a negative one,
shou/dn't be there.-..and the fact that it's the cleaning
woman who is then also made to say, she's the one who says
'at least 1 didn't work for Jews'...
L21: I didn't hear that...
Q: Not in the bit we saw, but afterwards, when they're sitting
in the...in the resaurant in the devastated restaurant,
mopping up...
L21: I missed it...
Q: In that case let's just listen to that
L21: ...the bucket...P
fas ...yesp more so than perhaps the other one...the putting
together of
L21: ...but what I was thinking as I was seeing that is...as it's..
if it would have been an actual female playing that role, it
would have been more of an attack, more explicit; as it's a
man playing a woman, you see it more as comedy rather than
attacking a certain part of society...although it i_AL attackini
a certain, part of society...
Q: ,,,so it complicates the issue, certainly...
L21: If they would have had an old cleaner then you would have
felt sympathy possibly for what she was saying...also would
have felt sympathy or shock at a bucket being put over her
head, but as it's somebody obviously in dra g, someone putting
Q: ...an hour or so just chatting about the film, about comedy,
Monty Python, anything like that...I mean I've got a few
particular points I usually raise, that I want to cover with
everybody, but I mean...just kick off in a way with sort of
responses...what...(H15) what did you...
H13: I was comparing it to Life of Brian which I found very very
funny, and I think...I think they succeeded with Life of 
Brian because they had, they were developing one thing,
whereas here there's...they' v e got so many little slots,
some work quite well, some I fthund less than moderately
funny...the only one I found extremely funny was the man
exploding, you know, I thought that was great 	 and some,
I've been quite generous when I've put down, like the first
One I didn't find all that funny, but I've put down a '3'
you see...I wonder if they made them in sequence, as they're
shown, or, I became interested, to say now, did they make
the man exploding first, and then they sort of burned them-
selves out...
Q: ...that I don't know but	 don't know what order they were
actually made in...so you'ld say that the exploding Mr
Creosote was the one that was certainly the funniest
RD': Yes	 yes,yes I'm sure if you took a...went out on the
street, every body would say...(laughter)
H 11: I certainly thought that was the funniest	 but I'm that way,
I've certainly watched it with other people and they've
found it absolutely revolting, in fact they've been turned
off by the whole, the whole thing...the whole programme (?)..4
ossibly it's attacking females there...
I don't think it's as good as some of their earlier pieces...
but that is certainly the hit-spot of it; I find it's quite
clever, rather than amusing...
H13: ...the way they lead from one to the other is...that they've
thought about quite a lot...
...I mean some of the bits like in Holy Grail and Life of 
Brian would be side-busting, you know...(?) ...but this one,
I think it's clever the way it's done, it's put together
nicely, but it's not actually funny in many places...
H13: Who directed Life of Brian? I've noticed Terry Jones had
directed that one...
Umm...Life of Brisda...I think it was Terry Jones and Terry
Gilliam, wasn't it...
Yes I thought it was perhaps a
what's he dime recently...
Q: who?
E13: Terry Jones has done something else recently...
Q: Terry Jones direoting.I'm not stre...oh of course yes I
mean he's done this what'sit, Peresonal Function, Private
Function, not Private, not Private Fan...what is it, the one
about_  no, yes that was somebody else, but	 thinking
about...Personal Services 
H13: Oh that's right yes, yes...you see that one about that nice
little song in the, in the sort of the Oliver vein about
the sperm and God being irate, You see, I mean you've got,
you've got some, you've got a good idea there...
Q: Yes...but for me that raises, both of you have raised an
important question that, I mean, did you have problems
filling in the...this, this thing here?
H13: No...
Eli: No, I found that the easiest to fill in
Q: Ies...coe I mean what a few...a point a few people have
raised is that...I mean, the question ishbasioally, a range
of funniness, how funny it is; now I mean you've both sort
of indicated that it's cleverly done, there's a, it's a
great idea and there's all sorts of things going on, so that
there are presumably other things that one appreciates or
likes...
E13: Oh yes, I think it's a shame just to judge it you know on
its, on its 'laugh-fee-toe...
Q: but what...in other words, what other sorts of pleasure
are there going on there apart from, apart from funniness?
H13: There's.., there's some quite nice visual...I wouldn't go so
far as to say visual delights, but 	 not a an 
about
 unattractive
jumpingfi].m...I mean the very fact that you're 
one thing to another keeps you, keeps you attentive and
interested akl the time...I just think it's a shame that they
they didn't get hold of some of the things and take them a
step further...
E li : I was, when I was answering, sorry...jump in...was trying to
compare it to my feelings when I first saw it, because I
think that some of them certainly do sour when you've seen
them a couple of times...
El i:
new venture for him, 'cos he
cak which ones...which parts in particular...
Hil: The Crimson Permanent Assurance I thought was...was brilliant,
I mean the whole idea is very good, I mean the idea of having
all the awning and turning it into a sail and sort of
brealing bits off and using them as... and the filing
cabinets as cannons I thought was superb...but yes, once
you've seen it, I've seen It a couple of, well three or four
times, you think well oh well yes, that's fine...and there's
nothing, there's no depth to it...a lot of their programmes
you can see, and every time you look at it, you see something
different...and the only thing that I compare with that is
the Mr Creosote sequence, 'cos every time I look at that,
there's some little other bit that you can see, that's...
very cleverly put together...Eiracle of Birth and Growth and
Learning, I think It tends to be rather sexual, overtly
sexual and / think that puts a lot of people off; it doesn't
bother me because I just think it's...it's a laugh...
Q: Yes, well can we...stick with that for a moment, and sort of
compare, I mean there are two sections I've sort of chosen
deliberately like that, 'cos one is clearly sexual, overtly
sexual...and there are, well there are a few other bits in
the next sections which are more violent...I mean you've
got the 'Fighting Each Other' part bits, and the leg having
been chopped off, and then you've got the Live Organ
Transplants, you've got a lot of sort of visual violence
there and sort of bodies being hacked up; I mean whiah of
those, how do you compare those two?
1111: Well I found the live organ transplant...probably..,I found
it pretty bad when I first saw it, I dcbn't like a lot of
blood spilling about...right over the top, wasn't it...
(laughter)...
Qs Yes...but do you remember...do you remember your actual
physical response when you were watching it first time...
H11: I didn't feel too bright over it...but I still thought it
was funny...but certainly the bits when they	 the conception
was good and the sequence where they're actually sort of
sa ying to him, you know, fish out the donor's...donor's
card out of hhs pocket...I thought was very good, but the
next sequence, where they're actually hacking it up, I though'
was a bit...I didn't find that too pleasant...
H13: I think the fact that they, it goes over the top, somehow
makes it less, less horrific...
H11: Oh yes,...
H13: It's like...there's The Exorcist which a potentially very
frightening film but they just take it too far and it
becomes laughable...but had they stopped at a certain point
you know, it would have been incredibly frightening...
Q: I was really frightened actually...
H13: ..but having their heads spinning round and thinks like
that and...you know it becomes ridiculous, and yournyou
don't relate to it any more...
Q: I see what you mean...
H13: ...and you do with that...I mean this, I mean he must have
lost about three times his normal amount of blood and so
forth.
Q: But I've never, I have observed, I think it was true for all
of you*...and lots of other people as well, that however sort
of horrible they say it is, they still laugh...it seems that
that's	 but is that, that's a different sort of laughter,
isn't it...
1113: Mm, probably...though I didn't laugh all that much, I don't
'Milk, in that one. In that one where he's had his leg bitten
off, because that again wasn't sidesplittingly funny you
start to say, now... I wish they'd find his leg, where is
want to see what's happened to his leg (laughter)...
whereas if you'd put a...huge jokes in there, you wouldn't
give a sod about the leg, would you...
Let's go back to...any other pleasures, apart from, you
mentioned visual pleasures...
I mean you've got this very...they seem to have...not put
much of old Gilliam's animations in...but and done things
like as you were saying this pirateshipcumoffice building,
and I stppose quite an otiginal way of...of using things...
taking the fans off the...so you could ...I mean you go through
thinking yes yes that's very very clever, you know, that's
quite ingenious and so forth...
Q: Yes...yes...that's what you're enjoying...
1113: yes, yes...
Q: I mean I think another important thing, is it not, is
Performance, to some extent...I don't know, did you see the
I don't remember seeing, I don't know, I've glanced through
your questionnaire but I don't remember, did you see the
original series? or have you seen it?
I've...I've, yes, we're talking sort of early seventies, I
can vaguely remember quite a bit of it, and certainly now
they're rerunning the series a lot of it sort of comes to
mind, when I see it, but I can't say I remember it very
clearly...
Q: So seeing, in Meaning of Life, seeing seeing the performances
of the, well of the Monty Python team, does that have any
Particular pleasures?
Hil: Yes, because I think actually just seeing them sort of brings
on a bit of a laugh, because you're almost anticipating
before...
H13 :	and so you can be disappointed when when you know
something's going to happen, or you want something to
happen, and sometimes it doesn't; now whether they've done
this, they're doing this on purpose, because they're fifteen
years on or whatever,...people'll be expecting something to
happen here...but even though you know something's going to
happen to that fat man, you kne,,...every time he pukes into
the bucket, you still laugh, although...it's very very strange
why you do, you know 	 (laughter)...
Qi ...which is, yes...
E13: (laughter)...'cos you know it's going to happen...
Hil: I find particularly with ones of theirs I've seen before, I
tend to lau...as soon as I see what's coming, I tend to
laugh, and then I sort of remain fairly quiescent throughout
the performance, and then I have a bit of a titter at the end
again...but...I know what's coming with a lot of things
it is anticipation, I think, it' R	 they're good actors,
* These two respondents watched the film together with H12.
basically, and whatever they do, they even sort of, any of
the sketches that fall, fell flat, relatively speaking, I
think the acting in itpand the performance, is stilfklgood...
H13: Eric Idle is the...the sketch about the Grim Reaper, as the
hostess, was excellent...
Q: Yes, Yes...in fact.., that can lead us on to something else,
that, I mean the fact that they Piay women as well...
E13: But I mean,.. Graham Chapman and Terry Jones play pretty
awful women...(imitates voice)(laughter)	 I don't...but
thinking back, looking at the tape of the Monty Python
that's on the end of...at the weekend...an& theme's% there'n
two classic things there, one's the eatep in tha tree%
roosting, and the other one's the son in the tme.mk
who's a coal-miner, or he's it got a toll eLoNin the nine
and he's going home to these parents who Wre Tle:5Tvelerits,
(imitates voices) and...they're very...sli ght ideas, aren't
they really, I mean...
Q: Yes, so...how does, how does the writing, the script and the
writing in Meaning of Life compare with...
H13: I don't think too much about the writing of them but I
imagine they're conceived as, or by those chaps sitting
round a table and...saying you know this is, wouldn't it be
good or funny if we did this...
Q: It's.., a tough question really but I mean it does strike me
that I mean, with something like the coal-miner and play-
wright sketch, as you say it's a slight idea but it actually
works very well, whereas in Meaning of Life you seem to be
H13: But-it's%such it's...it's a very good idea, it's such a
good idea that, you know the very fact thit...you know the
very fact that you've got this role, not role-reversal but..
I don't know how you'd describe It, I mean it justy lz;4EMWA
it's not contrived in any way, is it, it's a natural really
for...something funny to come out of...
H11: I think with their earlier performances what they seemed to
do is take something that was fairly normal in life and put
am edge on it, a *wist on it...like the sort of, the reverse:
between, the sort of the son and the playwright parents, sox-
of thing...there's all sorts of things like that, I mean the
one on at the weekend...the 'Attila the Hun show'...brillian.
skit on these American sort of...shows...I think they just
take things from life, put a twist on them, and it's very
funny, because you can almost see that sort of thing
happening...
H13: ...oh yes, and there's, and there's Some quite accurate bits
of observation, like there's John Cleese, mounting his wife,
you know, and it, you know, anything that's in a classroom
is not interesting whatever it	 you know you turn off:
(laughter)...anything that
Q: would you...-would you describe that as satire?
H13: Yes, I think you could do..I mean...that little tiny bit?
or the whole film?
Q: No, that...that sort of thing where you take an idea, you
either turn it upside down or you exaggerate it, just tb
show how ridiculous things are, effectivel y the childbirt]
as well, I mean...
H11: Yes...
Q:	 mechani...the over technologisation of childbirth and
the callousness and coldness...
HII: ...that's right, they're almost productionline techniques...
Q: 'cos I'm not sure whether...to call it satire or not...
H13:	 closer to satire than perhaps, or the closest to
satire they've been
Q: Yes, maybe...a lot of the, compared with Holy Grail...
H13: I haven't seen that, I've only seen Life of Brian and...and
thatt(laughter)...and a few Monty Python shows on the
television...
E ll : ...I think in general what strikesme, is they've gone further
away from what they used to be good at, and they've now gone
all out it appears to shock a large member of the, a large
number of the audience...I mean...if you stick with their
films, all right ignoring their first one, which was basically
a composition of all...sections of their television, it was
called And Now For Something Completely Different wasn't it,
H13: Ah, I might have seen that...
HII: Yes it was all sorts of bits and pieces from the television
programmes...you take the sort of...throtgh from Holy Grail 
Life OF }Irian, MeaninR of Life, they've gone for being more
outrageous, if you like, throughout...I mean Life of Br/a=
I mean caused a great stir, you know...certainly with the
sort of religious side of	 the population, they saw it as
you know, being completely...but it was very clever; but I
think Holy Grail  was very amusing, and not offensive to
anyone, I don't think anyone found that offensive...and it
was very funny indeed, I think that was probably their
funniest film...
Q: Well I mean talking about, I mean...offense, leads on to
the question of whether,,I mean if something is close to
you, and you're actually sort of concerned with...someone
having died, on having an ill relative, or being into
religion... then, you know is it, are you less likely or
more likely to find something funnyo because I mean what's...
from what you're just saying obviously there are groups,
roli gius groups and so on, who just felt the thing was
blasphemous and so on, and clearly couldn't find that sort
of thing funny, but...there is also another argument, that
it can help to...to release some sort of tension..if there
is humour about something which is quite close to you, it
might actually in some ways be easier, I don't know, do you
think it might..thinking about sort of, you know, the Death...
if one has someone who's died, or...
H11: 1 think it's important, how close the events are together...
(?)...I think having it, you know, on top of you know
literallYy within days is...just...not be on...but certainly
ince the sort of, the immediate pain was over, you know
whether it was a death or whatever, I think yes, it could do
that, it would take the sort of tightness out of the
situation...
H13: I think...I mean, if you, if you had suffered a bereavement
or whatever, or...you had a friend who was pregnant or...I
think you'dr..and you timid, we'll go to the cinema, I think
would...
Q: You may not think of it, I mean OK...
H13: No...because they've been going so long now, you know that
they're going to...they're going to try and surprise you
so you'd say to yourself, now do I wan* surprising? the state
of mind I'm In...
Q: I think you're obviously, you're obviously right...
H13: ..and you, if you did go, and somebody had Just died, you
know you'd go because you did want the sort of surprises or
shocks or whatever you anticipated...
Q: Yes, but I'm thinking more in terms of somebody who Just
wanders in without knowing what it is, or you know you drag
somebody along, thinking oh, you know 	 and they're in a...
reasonable mood and everything, I'll take them along to see
this...and you'd actually forgotten that...a couple of weeks
slightly fatuous question because you're right, if it's
something very close, which had Just happened and so on...
H13: ...but I know when my father died, and I was in Beverley
watching sbmething, this wasn't a funny thing about death,
but there was a hell of a lot of programmes, seemed to have
somebody dropping down in them dead, and funerals and so
forth, and my nun was saying 'turn it (off) or turn it over'
you see...r was getting tnto that or something...so...I
wasn't being troubled by it at all...
Q:    she was...
H1: ..and she was.
R11: I think we're almost coming back to the point where it's so
over the top...can you take it seriously? but I think some
people are going to be obviously more sensitive to it than
I was...I think those that are sort of, if you like into
that sort of humout, will...will be less affected by it,
they will probably find it amusing...and those that aren't
particularly tuned in to that sort of humour will probably
H13: But I mean I think they've always, haven't they, since the
70's, tried to shock, haven't they, or surprise, whichever...
I suppose it's inevitable that they become, that organs are
ripped out and people explode because otherwise, you know,
it is, isn't it, it's...it's a progression of ideas, you've
got to, otherwise people, people are no longer going to be
surprised or shocked...so the thing is you ask, what do they
do in their next film? (laughter)...
Q: There's some doubt about whether they will make another...
Umm...yes, so...is it possible to laugh at, I mean we've
sort of touched on why one laughs perhaps 	 there's a kind
of laughter of shock or something that...you know the vomit..1
why do we laugh at that...can we also laugh (H13 laughing)
do you think it's possible to laugh at smut on its own?...
H13: What do you mean on its own, do you mean...
Q: lust...just the mention of 'penis'
H134 No, no, it's got to, I mean like Eric Idle and his Noel
Coward...(laughter)...it's just...because you know that
Noel Coward would never sing about things like that, that ii
makes it funny...
H 11 :  ..but it's just like a Noel Coward song, isn't it...
H13: (laughter)...Yes I know...chap saying, 'what a dreadfully
witty song'...(laughter) 000 which also suggests that these
people never listen to the words anyway (laughter)...some
...going (nonsense sounds), everybody thought it was
wonderful; so again, you've got a little bit of observation
there as well, haven't you...
Q: Yes...I mean I'm not sure...I take sour point but I'm not
sure if people always actually go through that thought
process before...before deciding to laugh, before deciding
it's funny...
H13: Oh no they don't, it's
Q:	 in that, in that particular, in that particular instance...
Coward's voice and a song about dicks..(laughter) 000
Q: ...right...but what about the other, another sequence, which
is in the school, the classroom, which is about sex; now why
does that, I think, /mean I think that works quite well...
(HI3 laughing)...partly...OK I mean what's funny about that?
H13: (amid helpless laughter)...(?)...'There he is now, you'll
notice, chaps, that the penis is hard' 'what's that you've
got there"it's an ocarina, sir' 'bring it here'...it's
just again, this...incongruousness...(laughter)
Q: It is incongruous, but I mean are there not moments, isn't
that helped, isn't that sketch helped by the fact that it's
about sex?
H15: I don't think...I suppose so, because that's...I mean they've
taken the ultimate, which you'd think, you know, boys would
be interested In, but in a classroom situation, you know,
you turn off...whatever it is...so...
HII: I mean that...sort of almost opens up the sketch, talking
about vaginal juices, and I think there's a shock impact in
that...certainly what appears to be the headmaster, coming
in and sort of commn in and leading straight off into things
like that...
Q: That's part...that's partly what I'm getting at, is that...
just the,. OK there's the shock...shock impact of...straight
sex, being just talked about, mentioned, and similarly...
mind you, I mean I dtin't know, what do you think of this,
I've always been surprised over all the times I've shown
this video, I've never actually heard anybody laugh at the
moment when the kids in the Sperm Song, say like...scouldn't
mummy have worn some sort of pessary'...or 'couldn't you
have Your balls cut off?'. Those two particular lines never
seem to get a laugh...which always surprises me a bit
there's something wrong with me...but...
H13: Perhaps it should have been said by a younger kid, I don't
know...I think it's that, I think the timing's wrong, the
delivery's, somehow is cocked up, I suppose it could be
funny, yes...I think that's a technical point, though, that,
about thatnot getting a laugh, but it probably could be
funny, yes...
Q: Because 1 mean that's another instance of more or less, I
mean what, why would that be found funny,...partly because
of the kid...
H13: I mean at that stage there they've got, you know when those
kids leap out they're all sort of stage...(Italia Conti) kids
aren't they you know, they should be, they should be very
much in character in that sketch, you know they should be
talking Yorkshire...so somehow it starts to crumble, but
it's a very good idea...
I think to get that sort of impact it's...you've got to lead
off that sort ofsketch with...you know figure it so that
that child is saying while (?)...if you like 	 then it might
have the impact, but you've, you've been talking about it I
mean they've gone through a whole sequence where they've been
talking about soft of.. ex, not perhaps directly so much,
but you know in a roundabout way, and I think people tend to
settle, I settle into a, you know, a rut, and I say well this
is about (?) you know, and then I'm looking really for
something to shake me out of it...
Q : ..or a new angle...
Eli: yes...
H13: When they go across the road to the protestants' house, and
Eric Idle again is very good as this, this this sort of (?)
woman...
H11: Yes...that's a very good sequence, that...
H13: But, and then they, then tjtey really spoil the joke by, you
know, by...the one about...you know they've got...every,
talking about you know they've got hundreds of kids, every
time you have sexual intercourse you (?)...and all they need
to say you know is 'we've got two', I mean they, youcould
leave it there, you don't have to go, 'and we've had sexual
intercourse twice:'...
H11 : ..that's right...
Q: But to some extent that could be a question of audience as
well SOO
H13: But I mean...you know I mean if I was, you try to pull the
audience, don't you, notrnsink to their level or whatever
or,-.
Q: Umm...another qtestion; is it possible to laugh, I mean in
this film or anywhere else, I mean do you find yourselves
laFghing at things that you don't approve of?...things that
you soft of think oh...I don't like that...I really don't
approve of that...
H13: Yes, yes I think I can, yes...
H13: What, do you mean in the film, are you talking specifically
about that film, or anything one doesn't approve of?
Q: Well either, but we can start off perhaps more generally...
H13: I think you can make anything...you see, you see if you take
something like child abuse, it would, it would depend, it
would completely depend on how you decided to present that,
would it not?
about you know religious groups and so on, but I mean
individually, personally...
H13: I mean there's the bit, this is going back to the sperm, and
the irate god, I'm expecting this, you see to be a real, to
really lay into the Catholics, you see, but he lets them off
H11: (no)...
H13: ...however, going back, what, things, things you don't
approve of...
Q: ..what I'm think of...specifically sort of sexist and racist
jokes, which I would not want to laugh at...
E13 : ..but you can, you know you can highlight, you can highlight
sexism and racism and make people aware of it perhaps...you
know...
Q: No...no what I'm thinking of is...is situations where I hear
a sexist or racist joke and I laugh despite myself...
1113: I see...
CI: It's actually sott of saying you know I object tothat, you
know it's really something I don't like, but despite myself
I find it funny...can you think of any instances or..
E13: I think...sexist jokes, you know, the butt of that joke can
really be anybody, can't it...and you can change them about
to	 mean if you take something simple like 'What's
got an IQ of 144?' it could either be a gross of Irishmen...
you know you can put anybody at the end of it, can't you..,
you could put a gross of pupils from (school), a group of
people who live in Westview Rise, or whatever, you know
it doesn't have to be any particular category...
Q: Well...the success of the joke does depend on the
recognizability of that group
H13: Yes, but you'd use...if you were talking to an Irishman
you'd probably throw Irishmen in at the end, if you were
talking to a Nigerian you might put that in, you know, hoping
that he would be amused or whatever...( bemused laughter
from Q and H11)...but it's not dependent on any one
particular racial group, to make it funny ...I think when
a joke, when it's tied down vary much to a particular group
that's when it can become dangerous...but if you can
substitute any group you like in there,...obviously then
the joke doesn't depend on that..particular section of people.
Q: Yes...quite often I find myself, what I'm laughing at is the
cleverness of the joke...but then I think, oh yes, but I do
object to this, and so I shouldn't be laughing... and I mean
the reason I, I think there are, can you think of some things
in Luning of Life which are a bit in that category...there
are a few moments I think...
H11: ...the part at the end of the Creosote scene, where the
cleaninglady's talking about you know where she's been and
what she's read, and sort of ends up 'at least I don't work
for Jews'(laughter from H13)...but then that's totally
defused because the bloke's sort of shocked and horrified,
tips a bucket up over her, so that's...
Q: Yes, but does that make it completely OK?
H11: I think so, yes...
H13: ..it shows that they're not approving...
Eli :  ..someone doesn't approve of it, you know, they've made the
joke, and they've sort of made the sdirt of rhyme at the end
and the y've made the impact, but there's someone in there
whoyou an actually sort of label if you like as establishment
the sort of, you know, head waiter, in a posh restaurant, and
he's sort of shown that he's offended by...
g Q: Mayes...what do we actually laugh at, I mean...I suppose you
could say we're laughing at the discomfiture of the...this
woman...
H13:; I think again you don't expect, you don't expect that to be
said at that point,..it comes out very very suddenly and
very very surprisingly...
n Q: ...the first time you hear it, and after that you listen for
the rhyme, yes...I mean...some people have pointed, well one
or two people have pointed out that, I mean this goes back
to the fact that they play women as well, the fact that it's
a cleaningwoman who's vomited all over (H13 laughter) and
then gets the bowL of vomit over her as well...I mean which..
Eli : Well the Maitre D gets the, gets the vomit all down his leg,
doesn't, and he stands with a bucket...
1113.4 	 just wondered..,the people who watch Monty Python,
whether they are...whether they do get involved in the
character they're playing, or whether they just eat, you
know, that's Tierry Jones, that's Michael Palin, that's John
Cleese, regardless...so it doesn't really matter that it's a
cleaning lady...
Well.../ don't think...I don't think it's necessary to be
involved i* the character for it to have, maybe, possibly
some sort of reinforcing effect about abuse of women or
something like that...1 mean it doesn't have to be a conscioue
sort of...
E13: But I mean the fact...you see we were talking just a bit ago
about how 'at least I don't work for a Jew' and the man
expresses displeasure...(laughter)...so I mean what they're
doing, what the Pyhhon team are doing there, they're saying
'let's give it our veto', 'we disapprove of such statements';
now...do they have to do this ail the time; if you raise an
issue in a filmplike abuse of women, or anything sexist, do
you have to say 'I disagree with that, I disagree with that';
why don't you...you can show an example of this, can't you,
I mean why does somebody have to say 'Oh that's bad isn't
Q: Yes /...suppose it's an awkward problem...
HO: I mean it's, again it's like, it's like that laboured joke,
you, sort of you're in a way insulting somewhat the intelligen(
of your audience...]. mean 'cos it certainly doesn't encourage
any things which...which most rightthinking peoble would be
against, does it...Imean it doesn't encourage abuse of women
or... (laughter)...
Q: Oh it doesn't...in any very blatant way...
H13: (laughter)...not wanting to work for Jews...
point, I think, where I'm a bit uncomfortable; what's going
on in that point where...near the end...
H11: ..where he's being chased...
Q: ...where he's being chased.
Hli: That concerns me a bit...and he's, what is he accused of,
Qt Making gratuitous sexist jokes in a moving pictures
H13's: (prolonged laughter)
Q: ..and he gets...killed for it, executed for it, great, but
the film's still doing it...
H13: Again I think, you know, they're covering themselves...
(laughter)...
CO ...yes...but I don't think it works...
Eli: I think probably as far as your point's concerned with racism
or sexism I found that possibly the more uncomfortable part,
because I couldn't actually see what the point of that was...
I found that a bit disconcerting...
Qs Unless, I mean the only point seemed to be to have a bit in
there with topless women running around, I mean it's
difficult to see any other point...
that so you do go away, rather than just reliving these
wonderful little memories of men exploding and so forth...
and 'WI other funny thing with the child, that's just born,
(sound effect)...
H11 :
H13 : ...it's to go away sating you know, what was that all about?
Eli: I think the whole film throws up lots of questions and never
satisfactorily answers them, I mean the title of the film,
you're expecting to get some result at the end and what you
Q: ...well you do get something at the end, don't you...
H13: You were saying that there was a book in which there were..,
there were parts that weren't in the flan; as...I mean they
go through, where are we, Miracle of Birth, Fighting Each
Other, there's no, there's nothing about any relationships,
are there, or forging relationships...marriage, if you like,
br whatever, but there's nothing really, there's no section
for that, is there...
Q: Well unless...you know in the script, or in the book, it's
written, there's a section on Martin Luther arriving at a
Jewish family's house, and sort of ogling the daughters...
(HO laughter) I moan that's just not there; which I would
have loved to see, 'cos it's..it's really sort of about,
akain it's about sex and going to the toilet...since Martin
Luther conceived his...how many articles did he write, well
he nailed his articles to the door...(?)...he actually did
it when he was sitting on the toilet...annarently...
HII: That was never in the film?...'cos I thought, I remember,
when I first saw it...
4: Ah.,, now...
Ell: ...a sequence being in it, but I've had the video since and
it's not been in it...
Q: OK, tell me, Imean tell me about that because...
HII: I can't remember it very well because I only saw it on the
very first time I did see it...
Q: ...because I've only, you know I didn't see it when it first
came out, I've only ever seen videos and I've never seen
that...and nobody's ever mentioned that...but I mean it
could be that there was, there were prints which, and it
was later put out in...
'frighten it'
H13: When...Life of Brian wasn't shown in Watford, Hemel'
Q: ...initially..
H13 :	was shown in St.Albans, wasn't it...
Q: n  Y e e... that 's right...
HO: no I way just wondering if, I mean do authorities take out
H11: No I wouldn't of thought they would have touched the film,
would they, unless it was something they could chop off on
the end of a reel or something
Q:	 no I wouldn't have thought so...but yes, I mean, it's a
section in which...yes, Martin Luther, there's a whole little
thing about...I think it's Hymie coming back from the market
having done the shopping...suet, lard, dripping...
Hi l: 1 seem to remember him leaning over sort of a gate, like a,
almost like a lychgate,..
Q: and then
Q: ...they don't want, they don't want him to come in, because
they're frightened he's going to go for their daughters, and
he's trying to convince them that (?), I just want to go to
book, which is not in this version, is in the, in the
restaurant, where you've got this American couple, and
there's a waitress, who comes up and takes an order for
some food...
H 11 :	now that rings a bell as well, 'cos there's something in
it about...Holiday Inn Skins or something...'have a nice
fuck' or somet#ing...
Q: it is. That's in the script; that's in the book.
Hil: I'm sure there was something like that in it.
H13: so, what are you saying, you're saying the video version's
been condensed, or...
Q: Yes..or else...yes...it must...so I'll have to...
H134- That's odd isn't it, I mean why should that, why should
that be?
Q: Nobedy else has mentioned that to me, having remembered that
as being in, you know, so it's interesting, and perhaps it
was only some prints...
Hil: I'm sure it was there, I don't where else I'd have got it
from, I'm certain there was a, I was actually, when I watched
this, I was looking for a longer sequence in that...
H13: What, what certificate did that have?
H13: Did they have 'AA's...was it 'AA'? or did they have numbers?
Q: Was it '82...
H13: I see, yes, no '83
Q:	 not sure...
H13: I was just, I was just thinking about sexist jokes again;
supp...sexist...not sexist jokes, racist jokes; racist
jokes are probably more valuable to the race they're...the
joke r s about...and perhaps more positive, and destructive
when they're spoken to people who have nothing to do with
that particular group...because for the people who...say if
you take a joke about a man walking down North Street in
Leeds, which is a renowned place with lots of Jewish shops
and houses, and he looks into his friend's window and he's
scraping the wallpaper of the wall...it's ever such an old
joke...and he says to him, '...you're redecorating, soand-
sop e Abe, or whatever, the man says, I no, moving house'; now
then, if you tell that to a nonJewish person, then it will
reinfbrce that stereotype they have of the Jewish person;
but if you tell it to a Jewish person...
Q:  ..no...if who tells it to a Jewish person'...
nonJewish person hears that joke, whether...he might read
it somewhere, you know...depending on the sort of person it
is, it reinforces, perhaps, again it depends on the sort of
person he is, the stereotype he has of the typical Jew...if
a Jewish person reads that joke, is told that j oke, it may,
he may think now why are jokes like that being made about us,
about our meanness, you know, perhaps there is something in
our characteristic that has led to this idea...so, you know
it's destructive if said to a nonJew or a nonblack or
whatever, and perhaps a little more constructive if told to
the person it's...I mean you cam make jokes about the
English or...you cam generalise so much about them...or
whatever...
I'm not sute about...you see I'm not happ y about this word
'constructive/ because I think that...I mean there are jokes
and jokes, and there are jokes li-e that which are
relatively, I think there are characteristics which it's
possible to sort of not take too seriously in itself...but
there are a whole lot of racist jokes which are just plain...
you know really unpleasant...and I think if somebody hears
that then it's not a question of sort of learning to live
with that characteristic in some way or sort of questioning
it or something, I mean it just...it just increases...
HO: Oh yes, I mean there are degrees of racist jokes, I mean
that...that's a relatively...I don't know that many really
unpleasant ones...but I mean yes, they would beyond the pales
if they were...but I mean, the funniest things are things
which come out of observation, are they not? Well obviously
they've got to be because you can't just dream things up out
of the air, it's obviously some experience which has gone in
and been digested and comes out; but it's when you, when you
something of you becomes so contrived...
Q: That's what Terry, Terry Gilliam says; a lot of...a lot of
his stuff...is from observation
1113: But I mean...everything is, I mean it's...
Hll: I think that what I find good about Python is that almost
anY situation you're in, you can think of a parallel that
they've done; I drive my wife mad because, you know, I keep
coming up with these...from the year dot, you know...but
that's right; you see something, and you can just see them
doing it, and you can just see the way it goes, and you think
crikey, you know...
Q: I culd,,I could be writing it myself...(laughter)...
1113: Therets a...going back to the Grim Reaper, where they, where
the salmon mousse suddenly (imitates collapse)...and the
spirits leave them, and then there's...there's an instance
of them saying...it's almost like an afterthought, 'shall we
take the cars?'...
I think, no I think, when they wore conceiving a
Particular idea, they had this...they sort of...the special
effects and said right, let's do the cars as well, that...
you reinforce, and make the joke that bit, that bit funnier.
but there's other occasions when they, when they don't sort
of ext...take their ideas forward...which is a shame; and
that's why I wonder, I'd love to know how they made it, in
what order...
Q: Yes I think what happened was that they...
H13: I wonder if they looked at, I mean did they look upon it as
six different films, or did they do a bit of this, a bit of
that one, a bit of that one...
Q: Well I don't know, but what I've read is that they had quite
a lot 04 ideas and sketches, extendedsketches already
written, and they couldn't find any way of putting them
together, and somebody just had the idea, you know..
H13: ...expediency...(laughter)...
Q: ...look, we can put then like that, and it'll be like...you
know, the sequence of life...
HO: ..no, having got that, I mean did they, did they complete
one before going on to another one, I don't mean in the
necessary order but...
H11: I would probably think they did because...they're very
closely set, aren't they, / mean there's not a lot of
different locations...they're all, each one isset ...so
would have thought they would have, it would have, you know,
been sensible to have completed one before going on to
another one
The fish idea was nice...with the heads and so forth Again,
I'm thinking of, I'd like to see...whenever I see goldfish
there's al:rays a great trail of shit dangling from them, ybu
see, now not one of those had anything like this...
Q: ...lack of observation...
..and they do, they do other stran ge things, goldfish, and
I thought, you know, it'd be so good if they did thisl...
though they were all sort of keeping their distance and
swimming this way and that...that seemed to be a little
sparse, could have been...just ready for a bit of
development, that...
Q: What did either of you think of the Middle of the film?
Hi,: Now then...the middle of the film, Middle Age...
Q: Hunting the fish...
HI3: Live organ transplants...Oh yes, I thought that was
wonderful, that was the thing that saved the whole thing..
you know that was the top spot of all of that...it was that
first bit, 'hunting the fish',...(laughter)...that was a
crackers I mean had the fish not have been in,
wouldn't have got a '4' 	 but again you know you don't do
much of that in the film...
Q: Yes...but I think you know you do get a polarisation
Q: ...you get a polarisation between people who really like that
and people who (H13 laughter) are completely cold about it...
H11: I thought it was quite good...very funny...particularly the
first time I saw it...
H13: (more laughter)...That's strange, I'd forgotten about that,
but that...I enjoyed that...
Q: so...you would presumably say that's something that's missing
generally in the rest of the film, is the absurd, is the
really kind of dada absurd, which...
H13: Yes, yes...that's the, that's the only bit that's thrown in,
isn't it...
Q: ...which you get a bit more of 	 suppose in the
television prograltmes...the way they're constructed...you
get a bit more of that sort of stuff...
HO: I mean there's a nice link in tothe Middle of the Film...
(laughter) with the African unzipping himself...the middle
of the film...all the leads in...leadsin are nice, I think,
yes...
Q: Yes there's quite a nice one with Terry Jones covered in mud
and taking his hands away from his face...battlefield
I thought I noticed,this was just a sort of...entirely
subjective impression, I mean I was just sort of sitting there
watching, and when we moved from section 2 to section Y, when
we moved from...forgotten what it's called...sorry...
HO: ..Miracle of Birth, Growth and Learning...
Q: ...Fightink Each Other; I thought I suddenly noticed you (H1)
laughing a lot more...
HO: From here to there?
Q: 1...you seemed to enjoy the rugby...
H13;: (laughing) Yes...it's very very funny...
Q: ...so I thought ah, sadist:
H131 Hang on, the rugbywas in this bit, wasn't it...
Q: ...no it was at the beginning of Fighting Each Other...
H13: Was it? Oh...
Q: That's where I put it...
HO: Oh I see...oh you did, didn't you...
Q: ...because it's to do with fighting...Ithought...got *his
sadistic streak, (111, laughing)...he's laughing at people
having their faces trampled in the mud...
H13: I mean there could have been...I mean you haven't got anything
here, yoy know, sadomasochism or anything like that, it's all
sort of...this questionnaire
Q: ...I'll be reading between the lines No I mean, that's...
mean compiling all this stuff, it was very difficult to,
the original idea, actually, I mean it was a sort of pipe
dream, to actualy virtually psychoanalyse people...how do
you do it?...you know, to find out something about peoples'..
sort of you know...pulsions and sort of...and you know that
is fascinating, whether people laugh more at violent humour
which is kind of...unpleasant...
H13: But the thing...but the thing about that...you see we used to
play rugby against the boys at Jan's school...and there it
was the reverse, you see...I mean it wasn't the masters sort
of...it was the lads	 they were up here and I'm down here
you see: it was just so funny...(laughter)
: ...(?) and crippled
HO: Yes...people were, weren't they...staff were...3r ou know...
I had to, I mean I was in a dreadful state once...oh dear...
but there's that to do with it as well, you see.
Ell: Talking about that, it was a bit distant, but with that one,
my oldest son got beateA6 up, a couple of weeks back, in
Hemel Hempstead, quite badly beaten up, and...but, fine, yes
I was very upet at the time, but looking at that, and there
was a small little part in that, where there's a couple of
blokes, I think one had hold of this lad's arm, the other
one putting the boot in, and I thought that was, that was
very funny, It was just...you probably wouldn't notice it,
but, because it was over very quickly 'cos it was while the
camera was following something else, but it was just the
little piece in the back there, that...
HO: But again if you had two thugs doing that, you know, two
blokes with tatoos up their arms, you wouldn't laugh, but
because you know they're schoolmasters...that's made you
laugh...
Eli: Yes and the headmaster coming out with his foot...( laughter)..
E13: (laughter) Yes, that's the bit I laughed at, that lad has the
ball, you know...
Q: I think maybe that's something else, it's exaggeration,
isn't it...it's very important to a lot of humour...I mean
there's a lot of...exaggeration...
HII: I mean certainly with violence, I find that that kind of
violence is no sweat, I mean I can take that; but I mean
it's when you get the sort of television sequences about the
violence that's actually happened, like someone's let a bomb
go off in a store or something, there's people all over the
street with sort of bits off them and, you know, that's
completely another field...but you know it's not happening
to anyone, it's, you know, it's there fore a laugh and I
think it makes it easy to laugh at
H13: But I mean the juxtaposition of the rugby field and then the
First World War, I mean, poses the question, do people, do
men fight one another in wars because they indulge in rough
games like rugby at school...is this encouraging the...
belligerence in people? Is it nurturing something which we
all know is there but...
Q: I don't...I don't read it like that, I just read it as a
transition...from one scene
1113: Yes, no, yes...but I mean you could, you dould take it like
that, couldn't you, and you can see, there are the masters
of the school, encouraging this mayhem, if you like..and
you're laughing at it and the thing that makes it funny is
that, as you were saying, when the kid's being kicked in,
It's because it is by schoolteachers, but on the other hand,
you know, for schoolteachers read establishment, this
perpetual nurturing of, making surethat somebody's warlike
feelings are always, are always kept honed... don't do
anything to sort of channel those those...that violence into
a more constructive way, they just make sure, you know, that.
Q: You have got then that other sketch...playing the piano and
'rather be reading a book'
Well I think we've covered everythin g that I wanted to,
unless there's anything else...
HI3: I don't...I mean when, normally when I see a film, I'm not,
it's usually the next day or some time a fterwards when I...
when I start to thinkabout it or...
Q: You get yourself a tape and tape...
H13: No I mean that's...no I'm purely thinking of you...you're
talkitg tolots and lots of people, and I'm sure lots of
people think like this...in that, you know they digest things,
think about it...or perhaps you don't want, you don't want...
Eli: ...you want sort of immediate reactions rather than sort of...
Q: I think it is, Yes, I think it is immediate reactions, Yes
because considered reactions might well be, might well be
after talking to somebody else about it, for instance...
TAPE 4: L13.Li6 
Q: Could start of with...generally, what are your responses to
Meaning  of Life?
L16: I found it very, extremely funny, for me...even if you don't
laugh at something, it...makes me, I don't know I really
like it...
L13: I liked it a lot better this time than when I first saw it
in a cinema, I think...because I went with someone who really
didn't like it and objected to	 nd I picked upon
that...this time I think I found it enjoyable...though I mean
the problem with this film is I think it's significantly
different from the other Pythons...and it doesn't have a
great deal of the kind of manic humour, or succesfully mania
humour, I kind of appreciated in...the TV series...
Q: Yes...yes that's already raided two orthree particlar points;
I mean one, the relation between seeing it again and seeing
it the first time...what about you, (L16)?
LI6: Imean the first tImegyou know, I really reall y. there are
moments, I wasn't expecting this kind of humour, you know,
I've seen all the others before, like Holy grail is more
poetic t and more...but that one, like you know, ]the scene in
the restaurant, I mean I didn't know how far theMo, and then
itmake me really laugh and laugh, and there were other
moments, I started toget boredvand the second time, I enjoyed
more the film on the same kind of leveloyou know, like the
moment where they are, you know the Catholic church and the
Protestants, the first time I didn't know if I have to laugh
or not, and knowing the film now, Ithink it's extremely
funny, you know, because even if it, It looks a bit, could
be upsetting for some people, but for me, I know they don't
mean it, really, you would say on a first level, you know
you have totake this kind of critique...
Q: ...takea distance...
L16: Yes, it's like, you know, when you See all them dancing and
after you get this famous scene with the couple, protestant,
it makes the scene completely ...forr me, it has a meaning, if
you want...
Q: res...yes...I mean,there's a difference, you felt in a sense
inhibited the first time you saw it_ 
L16: No...I laugh really because I've seen all their films and
saw...' saw most of their shows on television, not all of
them especially in the '708, but I saw then when they were
repeated, and hike what they do, you know outside Monty
Python, very much, so first to see them makes me laugh
already, you know,.. .make me giggle, you know, but.. .1 don't
know, Isaid, I was really, yew, at the very moment I didn't
know where they wanted to go, so that one moment I was
really laughing like mad, another moment I...was not
embarassed, but I didn't know what they meant really...so
when I saw It the second time and...just...and the third
time, I enjoyed it very much, I must say...
Q: whereas in your case (L13) Yo u said you actually were sort
of Inhibited by being with somebody else...
L13: I was with somebody who I think objected to particular, not
sO much the, not the criticism of the Church or anything, but
just things like the, you know the baby dropping at the
beginning and that kind of thing...I think she found it kind
of sexist, offensive in a number of ways...that I picked up
on, and I felt responsible because I said or, let's...see a
Monty Python movie
Q: That's an important point, isn't it, yes, I mean whether
appreciation or finding something funny, is obviously partly
determined by the circumstances, I mean, how do you feel,
perhaps being here today, affects it in any way...
L13- : Umm...I enjoyed it more, this time round, but I also agree
that...I mean I think I got a better sense of a kind of
coherent movie...I mean I don't think that that movie was
particularly funny overall; I mean it left me feeling fairly
down, actually, the whole, the whole film, made me feel...
then that's what it's trying to do, I think...it's a
statement about the human condition in a way the other films
aren't...
Q: Yes that's right yes, a couple of the people I talked to on
Thursday said something like that as well, that although they
marked some things as being quite funny, it was difficult to
say, really, because although they are funny, there is
something else about them as well...
L16: Oh yes, that's true, yes...I mean, everything they're saying
it's, even...it's against something, you know in the society
actually, you know, and they're laughing at themselves too,
i lot, that's why it's very...and they were trying for
example, that, the sequence in the school where they really
talk on sex but everything, all the detail, you know, it's
like, you really start, not to feel embarassed, but you're
not used, you know, to this kind of...and after, if you
accept it, it's going to be extremely funny, because you
imagine, you imagine all those people who repress all these
expressions, you know...
Q: Well, in relation to that, that raises exactly the point that
I think there are points in that film, and...I wasn't
actually sort of watching and listening to you, but I mean
once or twice, with you and the others as well, it raises
this question, that are there points at which just hearing
somebody say 'penis' or...or seeing John Cleese's bum or
something...anything like that...just, just something sexual,
do you think that can actually make...
L16: For me...' must say, for me there are only a few words...
I don't understand all those words you know on sex for
example, like only a few slang words,...say in slan g, but,
I don't, for example there are words I still don't understand,
for me you know, so, I only saw it, I never saw it when it
was subtitled, you know, because...so there are still some
expressions in the film I just don't understand, I must say..,
Q: ..but do you think that there are, I mean either for you or
perhaps for other people, you can sort of say what you think
for other people, do you think it's possible for things to be
..to be funny just because they're, they're crude, or vulgar,
without being in a joke form?
L16: I...it's really strange, because I don't find that sequence
very very funny, it makes me laugh inside, you know it
doesn't shock me, but, I don't feel like laughing like some
other parts of the film, you know? It's...I don't know, I jusl
can't...it doesn't shock me at all, mean, because I do
understand that point of view, what they want to do, but I
can understand, if you see it, you know in a big cinema and
thm audience doesn't respond very much, so you can start to
feel embarassed,- I can (have) this feeling...
L131 There are very, there are very sort of different levels of
attitudes to sex in the movie; Imean on one hand you've got
the very explicit discussion in the class, the classroom,
which actually did, did...you get kind of saturated with the
stuff, and I think they actually achieved a genuine shocking
capacity somehow in that scene, in the dialogue of that
scene to a certain extent, but then you've got nese sort of
halfnaked women chasing around, and that's using eex in it's
very sort of traditional CarryOn film type of way ...and
that's one of the problems of the film, is that A can't
quite decide what they're doing, I mean...
Q: Yes, or is made up of...hotchpotch in that sense...I mean,
for instance when the...at the beginning of the restaurant
scene, where Eric Idle's Noel Coward...immediatelY, he says
'Isn't it frightfully nice to have a penis?1..I noticed that
you just sort of...laughed a little bit at that moment...
what made you laugh at that?
L13: Um...well it wasn't just, I don't know, it wasn't just the
mention of the word I penis'...no, It was the juxta...the
incongruity, the comedy lies in the incongruity...
L16: I think the fact that he's singing in a very posh restaurant
with very smart, I mean upperclass people, and he's...how do
you say, Noel Coward, sings, and it's...very good, makes me
laugh, not what he's saying, but more in, you know in the
context of everything, you know...he would have said the
same thing, in a different, it would have been different to
there, because everyone looks, seems very normal, they
applaud at the end, say 'Oh very nice'...it's...they wanted
to show the absurdity of language and the way we, you know
we're using it, why is it shocking to say 'penis"penis' or
I don't know, you know, It would be not shocking to say
another word...I mean you can...really talk a lot about...
Q: I mean that raises as well another question that when can we
distinguish between what's funny and what is pleasureaUle,
you know, enjoyable in other ways 	 Somebody mentioned again
on Thursday that they found it difficult to actually fill in
that sheet, because of sort of saying, they enjoyed a
particular sequence, but it was difficult to say if it was
funny
L13: Exactly; I gave, there are a lot of 'moderately funny's and
kind of 'averagely funny's on
L16: For me, I put, I put, well one extremely funny; I must say
the scene in the restaurant makes me laugh, I don't know why
but it just makes me laugh, maybe because, the total absurdity
of the scene and.., and then, they went so far, and for me
it's really incredible. ..,and other scenes, like at the end,
you know there are moments like...is it Eric Idle, when he
he leaves the restaurant and...well, you know, I don't think
It's, I know what he wants to say, but I think	 he went to
a (7) and something, and I didn't find it funny...but it's
true, there are moments extremely funny, it's very difficult
to put 'extremely funny'...'moderately funny'...
Q: ...other kinds of enjoyment, other kinds of pleasure, yes...
L16: I found for example that if I compare with The Holy Grail, I
felt less pleasureable to watch as a movie, you know; in
Holy Grail I remember the moments which are really Pleasureabl
to see, to watch, you know like...'cos they were beautiful,
they were a kind of poetry coming out of there; there it's
completely different...but there are moments I really
enjoyed, yes...I mean the beginning, with this dance like in
Oliver, you know, all those...nurses and...I think it's quite
funny...
L13: I don't know...1 mean in terms of just pleasure, I had a
greater conception of this as a movie...it also had, and I'm
not sure it actually works in its favour, it had higher
production values than most of the others, or at least the
you know, TV Monty Python, or the earlier, first films, and
it seemed to, the pirate thing at the beginning, seemed to
have all the...afford to kind of create that effect, the
kind of noisy sweep , you know...
	 yes...and ilso the fact that the different parts are set
in completely different locales...
Li, : Yes, yes...
Q: ...so that you know you're not always in the Middle Ages
L13: Yea, right...
Q: ...practically...you're actually switching from one sort of
place to another...
L13: Well I felt that the way, I don't know w4ether, maybe the way
you'd divided it up into sections, Imean, seemed to, the
sections seemed to kind of absorb lots of different kinds of
types of humour, and I found it diff...I found it hard to...
I mean there'd be like...one particularly, there'd be a
particularly absurd moment that'd have me rolling about...
(be into it?), then there'd be, in the same package as it
were, there'd be a stretch that was relatively, I thought
was really boring, I found it hard to decide how I should
express my reactions, as a total...
Q: I think, yes, that's a problem I had ,,,I know exactly what
you mean, and the only way round that I think would have been
to have like twenty sections
L1g: Yes, in a way, even if you...I found, I went to see some
Festival of Cartoons, you know, the best cartoons, you know,
and you re	 dveryone's laughing like mad for the first two
or three car...and then after you laugh less and less because
you're losing.. .1 don't know, you always find, they are the
sam e, 1 think they are still as...the last one is as funny as
the first one; Tom and Jerry, some of the hreat ones, you
know, really...but your it's like Laurel and Hardy, you knob
you really laugh a lot at the first ine, and after, then yot
just can't, or you lose your ability to laugh
Right, but then...then...a lot of us still watch, I mean I
don't watch it that much, but I mean quite often if Laurel
and Hardy or something like that is on the telly, 	 still
watch it...now why is that, because I'm not going to sit the
and rill on the floor and find it extremely funny; what are
the other pleasures that are, that wake us watch that sort oi
thing over and over again?
L16: For me, it that film I'm sure I saw things I didn't see the
first time or the second time, because.../ know for example
the gag, I know the story, I know what's going to happen, so
I'm watching more round the...so You found you...or you
found for example the Python characters, they dress in a
different way...
Q: I think something another person identified was actually the
pleasure of the, of the performance...of the performance...
L13: What, 'cos of the actors, expressions, that kind of thing;
yes, oh yes, particularly Cleese, oh I think it's absolutely
true, yes...
Q: ...although tkere are still...somebody actually said the other
day that they didn't	 didn't go for Cleese's films all that
much, they preferred to watch Michael Palin...
L13: Yes, yes...
Q: ..that's exactly it...Yes
L16: But I found for example the...the short, you know the, on the
In surance, that for me is absolutely incredible, I mean it's
really really...at the same time it's pleasure, you know
because there are so many references in all those old movies,
you know...Erroll Flynn movies, and everything...or Ben Hur...
and this (is) really incredibly clever and funny, I really...
very poetic even at some moments; the idea, you know this old
building, floating and...they're taking everything out, using
like on a boat, it's... I really found...very very funny...
that one very pleasureable, there was nothing, you know like
the other,- you were saying you know with the babies or, you
can be shocked even in the restaurant with all the food and
everything; but there it's only a real pleasure to watch
But that raises, that does raise the question of what kind of
see what I, knew what I mean? What kinds of people do you
think Monty Python in general, or this film in particular,
what people it sort of appeals to...
L13: They're sort of trying to cover all bases, really, aren't
they, in a way...-.
Qs You think this one is more so?
L13: Well...I don't know, I mean it's got all these film reference
and things...
L16: Yee, if you are a movie buff you enjoy it even more than
someone who doesn't go very often to the cinema, because you
just realize, there's something clicking in your mind...
Q: Yes, that's true
L13: But then Monty Python was always like that really...you'd
have Parodies...
CI: Yes...that's what I'm getting at, what kinds of people would
have been watching the television programmes in '69 to '74
Did you see them?
Li,: / saw...most of them I did see, I know they were on late, at
the beginning they were on very late at night,
Q: ...and irregularly, yes...
L13: I don't know...I seem to remember it was, I can remember it
was quite slow catching on...particularly the first series
wasn't terriblY well appreciated
L16: Yes, I'm watching the you know...
Q: ...the repeats...
1,16: yes, again, but it's very funny, I don't, maybe because I
wast i t in England at the time, so I can't make any reference
on what they're saying, but one evening I watched it and I
didn't find it funny at all, it was clever, I could see, you
know, what they were saying, but I didn't laugh at all, one
moment...it was two weeks ago...
Q: So in a sense it's dated...
L16: It might have dated a little bit	 the one last week was
quite funny, with Terry Jones dressing up like an archbishop..
bishop and going running in the street in London, you know
like a James Bond movie.. that was funny, yes...the one, the
previous one,...
L13: Yes', what's funny, in terms of shocking people, I can remember
watching that on one of those early repeats, with...with my
friend who was the on of the local vicar, you know, I
remember his father getting up and turning it off because he
was so pissed off with it...he just (?)...in terms of what
shocks people, it obviously did have some sort of effect...
Q: Yes, yes...That's got something to do with the, you know what
we've just been talking about, it goes for two sort of areas;
one is the intellectual abstract appreciation of sort of
Plastic references and other references, and so on; and the
other thing is to do, as you say, with a more...something
which people can be shocked by, or which can be attacks on
institutions...or else sexual, sex or violence or something...
and, I mean, whyfor instance, can you say anything about what
I said, about why p as Sou say you feundthe restaurant scene
very funny...any particular reasons...
L16: Well it'5...n4 I just can't explain it because really it
should shock me but...that enormous person coming inside the
restaurant, first as I say it was a shock when I (saw it the
first time, I didn't know where they wanted to go, and I said
OK it's, you know, John Cleese, French waiter, all the
cliches in all the movies, all right	 and after, when they,
he started to bring, it's only the way for example you see
that woman, she's cleaning and she receives everything on her
back, I mean it's, I don't know, I can't explain why it makes
me laugh, I've no idea really; it's just because, it's like
you knovip a cartoon, you know, there's no logic, you see him
exploding at the end, and you see his watch ticking and his
heart and everything; I mean...such great ideas, absolutely
fantastic...the gag in itself is not funny at all, but...I
know for example I've got a friend, he saw it in France, I
mean he said people were really dying laughing during that
sequence, you know, because...well Monty Python's quits a,
kind of cult (?) in Paris, but I mean really it's amazing...
I found it really very funny...it didn't	 mean, I don't
mean I was shocked by Some other sequences, but I can under-
standy like the one in the 'Third World', the Third World
ealled Yorkshire, you know, and saying all those, I said, well
you know, I don't know how to judge it, I found it funny but
it's, it can be offensive, I can understand...
L13: I found that funny, and I'm from Torkshire:.but
L16: ...but I mean, you know exactly that they don't mean it
really, you know...I mean they, it's a kind of, because there
is a cliche, you know, so they're using that cliche against,
against us...
Q: Well I think there is a problem there, isn't there, of saying
about comedy, ellat oh, they don't mean it, so it's all right,
I mean I think that's, that's, I don't really, most of the
time I don't really accept that as an argument, because in a
sense it's still, it's still there as a representation...
L16: Yes, I know what you mean, but I don't know why I...
Q: ...and it reinforces...
L16: ...I laugh, I will laugh because they are laughing, you know,
I don't know I can't explain really, I don't know why it
doesn't shock me...
Q: Yes, I mean in general if...another thing I'm interested in
is whether one can laugh at things which normally one would
say, oh I don't laugh about things like that, I mean outside
this film, about racist jokes or sexist jokes and things like
that; you see what I mean there's a sense in which one can
actually find a racist joke or something actually 'funny',
because one...there's something clever about it, or something;
and I think sometimes that goes on in films like this, I mean
whether one finds oneself drawn into the, say the, perhaps
the possible sexism of the women chasing the bloke near the
end...
Li,: But I felt in a sense that this film was rather unconvincingly
striving for balance or something in a way that...I mean,
people kept kicking around Bunuel as a kind of comparison
when this came out...but when they are going to critique
catholicism they have to put a balancing critique of
protestantism, which I didn't think was that funny, I felt
that I could almost see them thinking, we can't get away with
this, we've got to have, you know the balancing statement in
there; I felt also there's this peculiar sort of comment at
the endwhere they were kind of trying to excuse themselves
by making that statement about " let's have lots of pictures
of penises so we can get the shockvalue, you know...kind of
incorporate what may well have been their strategy, in a way,
into into the film...
filmy really... t Cos there is 000 in the original script, or in
the Book of the Film at least there is a sketch which isn't
in the film, which is of Martin Luther, who's Jewish,..which
just isiOt...it's quite...
L13: Martin, sorry, Martin Luther...
Q : ...as Jewish.
L13: Oh I see...
Q: Yes...oh no, hang on, Martin Luther arrives at a Jewish
family, yes, it's very much as a heavy Jewish stereotype,
an d Martin Luther is this rampant sexstarved character who,
who's always after the daughters...they try to keep Martin
Luther away frok the daughters. (?)..._,.. .(L1, laughs) That's,
it's interesting that that didn't end up inthe film...
L11: ..because of the Jewish srereotype 000
Q: ...well_I suspect, yes, I'm not sure, that's something
perhaps I ought to find out about, but it's not in the
film, obviously...
Let's just have a look and see if there's anything else...
I mean we touched a little bit, I mean, on why you think other
people may not like it or find it funny, I mean...mentioned,
(L13), that, you know one or twoexamples of people who were
shocked by particular things...
L13-: Umm...I mean I think, yes you've got to be attuned tothat
kind of humour to begin with,I think...so what do you mean,
why should, why do I think other people should be shocked by
Q: Yes, I mean for what sorts of reasons do other people not
like it,. I mean we mentioned people perhaps who have religiouE
associations who were shocked by that, or as you said, the,
was it woman you saw it with before, who was shocked by, well
maybe not shocked, but who objected to then, certain images...
L13: Yes..,
Q: I'm just wondering ifthose are the, if that's the only way of
looking at it, maybe there, whether there are other things,
I mean people who perhaps don't like the liver transplant or
the...
Li,: Well yes I ean think of lots of people who would just be...
it's very difficult because in a sense if the film's
j ustification is to shock, Imean, perhaps, they're the
people on whom it works most effectively, you know, it's a
problem, if it's setting out to...shock, in a way,...I know,
yes, I mean I can think of a lot of people I can just put
down, who would be really, would get up and walk out...not
because they objected to it on moral grounds or anything,
but just because they found it physically, just...you know,
even a serious film with a lot of violence in it, they'd get
Up and walk out, the same thing there...
Q: So the important think to question then is, why is it that
some people's response tp physical, I mean the exploding Mr
Creosote (?),for me it's partly that as well...while some
people respond by rejediting the whole thing, there are some
people who can enter into it and actually find it funny...
L16: I found myself, you know, in a lot of things, films, I just
can't watch real, for example, an injection, or something
like that, I wouldn't mind to have it myself but I can't
watch it; and that,the organ... live transplant...I think.,.
because, it's the way it's done, I don't know why, they
really, they arrive like butchers and...the guy's...you
don't see anything, but, and everything is over the top,
you know, the blood coming...and...it's a joke, I mean,
that's the way I take it, if you take it, you know, seriously,
L137: But it is just, it is just kind of evocative enough to, to
make you slightly queasy, it's not, it's not so kind of
parodic...
L16: But ...it is a Parody but
know, they're talking, I
were bringing some Asian
if you've seen other fitms like, you
saw a film on television where they
or Indian people in England and they
were taking one of their kidneys to sell to rich people who
needed a transplant...what was this...Coma, this film, this
American film, did you see it? where they got Kirk Douglas,
no, Richard Widmark was a surgeon, and they were, all the
Patients were really healthy, and they were operating (on)
them...0K they were killing them in a certain way, and they
were taking their kidneys, and their liver or anything, and
they were, all the thing s were kept in a, they were all kepi
in a huge clinic somewhere outside...and it was absolutely
frightening, but there, they come, two guys coming and...
'excuse me, we need your liver s ...it's a joke, something on
the society...I agree with you, either you take it or you
don't take it, but it's...I know a lot of friends, I mean m:
family wouldn't understand this kind of joke, I don't know
why it makes me, this makes me laugh...
Q: In fact now you've mentioned it, I mean just...I saw
something in the paper a few weeks ago exactly about people
taking live organs from people...I think it was is South
America, maybe in Brazil, somewhere like that...
Lib: Yes, some people are seaing
Q:	 there is a market...
L16: and that...that play, I think it was 0nBBC2 a few months ago,
it was really frightening, it was like a thriller but...those
people they were paying I don't know, a thousand pounds, they
came to England tohave an operation somewhere...outside
London in a ...and they were taking, were given one kidney
and they OK they were flown back to India, of course, one
had a kind of disease and everything came out but those
kidneys or...were kept, because they were sold to private
clinics where rich patients... need them...0K it was a play
but little by little you can see it coming, you know,
L15: Some of the things that appealed to me in that film were the
least...were the ones that were kind of least motivated by
any sort of sense of social satire...I couldn't pin then
down but that whole business about finding the fish, which
I just found really funny, and totally bizarre, and I couldn't
actually pin down but I dcim i t know, what...do you know what...
what are their references for that, the guy with the
elephant's head, and all this funny...
Q: I don't know...except dada, beyond saying that, that doesn't
explain, well it does and it doesn't...
L13: ..but I mean it may be why it struck me as having this
genuine sense ofthe absurd, you know...
Q: Yes...yes I mean I think that's very important, I mean I
found myself responding tothings like that as well, and there
is very much...there is that strand in this film, but it's
not as strong as in say in the television series...
1,16: Yes but maybe in a film they have to do something, you know,
which,to give a kind of story or to give something...I'm sure
you, I did wa*chtheir first film which was made from sketches
from television, you know, and it's very, it's extrem...I
found it extremely unfunny, I really appreciated but, I
watched it even with two people, I remember, and noone was
laughing...only one moment I really found funny, it's all
those old women attacking young people in the park, I mean
the reversal of...that was funny...(agreement)...but like at
the end when they, the Olympic Games for the disabled with
three coffins, you know, Imean, it does make me laugh but,
I do appreciate the...I don't know, i t 's difficult to szplain
why it doesn't shock me, I don't know why, I just can't,
cannot explain, you know, and I'm very conscious of racism
and everything, I just don't understand why it does 	 there's
a guy in France, he's really saying jokes, you know, and he
ant he was saying a joke about you know all those French
people living in Algeria, when they came back at the end of
the war...
Q: ...who was that...
L 16: Guy Bedos...
Q: Guy Bedos yes...
L16: ..yes t and he had a...how do you say, a sketch, not a ,ketch,
a...we say sketch in France, which is different in England;
it's a story if you want...the story of those French people
called O black feet' (pieds noire), you know, and they're
flying on a Moroccan or Algerian airline, and he's imitating
one saying, you know, the pilot, even, he just can't read
properly even...you know, and he was playing the...the game
of those people commenting, you know, and everyone, I mean
if you were against racism you would laugh because he was
laughing at those people, but those people, they were really
laughing because they thought he was laughing at the, the
Algerians of Moroccans	 and he had to stop to say it, because
he said, for him, he knew what he wanted to say, but both
sides ad understand the same way...
Q: Was it 41 thing called 'Les Arabes'?
L16: Yes, could, be, I don't remember...but I remember, in one
interview he just couldn't believe it, you know, the people
he was criticizing for their racism, they really didn't
understand his story at all...
CO	 which is a bit like Lial_akalk_a_p_g_iiirt and the Alf
Garnett figure in which...have you seen that? 	 Till Death Us
Do Part, which was a...
L 16: Oh yes...yes, I saw it...I don't like the second, the second
...(?)...the first, I saw the first (Part), some of them, I
found some of them quite funny, I mean, he is obviously so
racist and so, I mean it's so caricature', all those peoples
I mean that's the way I take it...
Q: ...it had the same problem, a lot of people watched that and
found themselves sort of...agreeing with him...(echoed by L16)
which is...
L16: It's like if you watch the Lubitch movie about the last war,
what was that, with Carole Lombard, and everything, you know,
and they...all the jokes on concentration, concentration
camps and everything...
L l': To Be Or Not ToBe...
L16: Yes, To Be Or Not To Be, I mean, it could be, could take it
as a very shocking thing when you really see the real
documents about it and you still laugh at it, I don't know
why you can explain it...and Lubitch was a. p robably a...I
would think about Jews or something like that and he was...
I don't know, he was a German, or something...he escaped to
Q: Yes, I mean that's, that's an important problem, um an
important distinction, isn't it, the distinction between the
kind of comedy which is irrational, and absurd and the one
which is to do with society or history...
L16: Yes...I think, sorry to interrupt you, but, I think, I agree
with you, that's why maybe I laugh, it's more irrational,
totally absurd, you know, as well; if it would be based on
a true, really documentary or realistic, I wouldn't laugh..,
or maybe I would be bored or shocked...
Q : ..and yet, Imean, the restaurant, the exploding Mr Creosote,
as you said it does, it is also a social attack...
L16: Yes, Yes, oh I undersAind that, you know, overf...overfed and
Q: Perhaps...perhaps the reason why some of those work so well
is becalse of the combination of the absurd and a social
attack...if it's too recognizeable as just a simple social
attack, maybe it doesn't work so well, and if it's completely
absurd some people will not respond to it...it's perhaps a
combination...I mean another question is, is to do with
exaggeration; I mean how does that work? Because that's
important in scenes like that, isn't it? When does exaggeration
work and when does it not work? (Brier interruption)...Un yes
I mean how does, when is exaggeration...when does it work and
when doesn't it? Because there's obviously a lot of it about
in Monty Python.
L13% Yes...well I mean, the kind of physical exaggeration...
Q: Yes. There's the Mr Creosote, obviously a gross exaggeration...
I mean I don't have any particular line on this, I'm just sort
of...It's clearly an important element...
L16: For me, I think exaggeration has to be in a comedy or something
like that; if it's in a thriller, or in a movie sometimes I
just switch off and I really get fed up and bored with all the,
you know, blood, more blood, and really you start laughing,
likeTexCiAIL_...1351._Ap:Msacre, I saw it at the National one
evening, I remember, and at one moment you don't know if you
have to laugh or not, and suddenly, everyone, you have to
laugh because if you don't laugh, either you are frightened
or you're, you leave...
Q: ..so what you're saying is...
L16: ...it's like (?) I saw it and...after half an hour I thought,
as I leaving, it's OK, I ts going to stay, and I just didn't
care at all for the people, what's happening on the screen,
because it was over the top and, it's completely irrational,
sG for me, irrational or absurd has to be comedy or...1 don't
know, something likw that, you know it works really in this
department but not really in a...
(1,1 se_ exaggeration...
L16: ..or, it has to have a logic, like when you see for example
what was it this thing on television, a thriller with a
reference with you know atom, atomic...with the word 'Edge'
in it...
Q: Oh...RAge Of Drknese
L16: Edge of Darkness. That's over the top In a certain way, if
you want...you know, but I really, that's really gripped me,
because it's really something which can happen, which already
hap p ened...and in a comedy or a cartoon I can take it very
easily, I don't know why...
LO: Yes I mean that's where the background comesfron, it is frok
cartoon, isn't it, it's from caricature...
L16: It's true, (?) at a certain moment they are at the limit, you
know, you say OK that's Monty Python so...could be, I can
understand that other people don't appreciate it at all.
Q: Yes; and the thing I'm interested in, among other things, is
sort of the purely unconscious ways in which we, the reasons
we respond you know, to some...to, say, the exploding Mr
Creosote, or whether we switch off and say that's, that's
just disgusting, horrible, don't want anything to do with it...
L13: It's absolutely disgusting but...
Q: ..or whether we can, yes OK, but whether we can say yes, all
right, it does look disgusting but 1 still find it funny; I
mean that to me, in a sense, I mean I'll come clean about it,
is to do, I think, with our sort of psych...psychological-
Psy chic sort of state...to do with our sort of, you know,
early childhood and so on...whether we find those things
threatening and distressing or whether we...
L13: I think we do, I mean there's...a let of laughter in that was
a kind of defensive exorcism kind of laughter, you know, I
think...and certainly when you start talking about things
like, you know, Chainsaw Massacre, then the laugh, I haven't
seen that particular film	 but the laughter, the laughter is
a response, you know, that prevents you, you know exorcises
fear...
L16: Yes, yes, it is...well, as I said, there are, yes, there are
all the movies, or mtvie or thriller, where you don't feel
like laughing even if they are over the top,...the way the
director maybe uses it, but...I don't knowmthere must be a
reason why we are...I don't know because, as you say, you
would see it, that scene in the restaurant, you would start
to be, you would walk out, or you would be disgusted, and you
should be disgusted, you know, there is nothing more...
Q: Or else after seeing this film, you probably wouldn't be,
you'd probably find it funny...(laughter)...
L16: Yes: Maybe...
L13: But there's lots of unmotivated violence in Monty Python
outside; or sort of gruesomeness outside that, I mean, the
knight having his legs and arms chopped off until he's hopping
around spurting blood	 or those scenes where the kind of
hand...there's like somebody watching TV and the hand cones
out of the TV and pulls someone's eyeballs out oftheir socket
and kind of (?) them or something; I suppose that is a comment
of sortsbut...
Q: Yes, I mean I think there's some debate about who's, I mean
the individuals responsible for it, and John Cleese and
Graham Chapman wrote the violent sketches, apparently, but...
but Terry Gilliam' s animations are quite...not so much in this
film but.., they're quite 'violent'...
L16: But...it's very funny because if you take all their films
when they don't play together, you know like Brazil, or The
Missionary or John Cleese and you know Fawlty Towers, I meat
there's still something which you found, you know which
belongs to Monty Python, you know, it's very funny; but in a
different way ; Brazil is really like a Monty Python film; I
found The Missionary, all the Michael Palin, very gentle and
very, sometimes very very funny with absurd scenes, like in
The Missionary I remember that scene with the valet, you knoh
in the castle, he just can't find hts way...and it's
absolutely hilarious, you know, because each time he's taking
people around he just (can't) remember the way, it's the
kind of thing whichpit's got a different sense of humour, it's
less aggressive...for example John Clem in jailliy Towera...
the one whth the rat, you know the Inspector, and the other
one with the dead guest in a room I mean absolutely..I've
seen (then) several times, but I'm really laughing...because,
and it's very clever, t1:14 way it's done, you know, the way he
plays with all the characters...
Q: Yes, but the character itself...I mean his own character is
symptomatically impressive...
L16: Very, Yes, yes...Of course he has to, you know, with the poor,
what's the name, Manuel, he's always beating him, you know,
having fun against some of the guests, or.,,
Q: I think, I can't remember who said it, but there's somebody
who said in Monty Python programmes any scene which starts
with lyrical music and a pan across the country side was
written by Palin and Jones...the y wrote those sorts of openings
sort of pan across the countryside and you see this Incongruous
figure standing there, sort of...this was their influence...
L16: Yes, they're more poetic and more...4 elS that's funny...
Q: ...and in fact there's a, there's an article, I think, no
there's an interviet with John Palin in'Cineaste', Michael
Palin, about whm they wrote different sorts of stetches and
it was to do with the fact, he has this theory, about the fact
that they came from Oxford and Cambridge; the two universities
encouraged different types of worldviews; one is more sort of
rural and idyllic and the other one is...
L16: ...I went the other day,...a friend invited me, she had a
ticket to see 'The Mikado' with Eric Idle, and I didn't
remember, you know I didn't, you know John Cleese but Eric
Idle for me is not as well known, I know the face, but the
name...and when he came on stage I mean all the audience was
absolutely laughing mad, and he was using so many references
of the actuality, you know, when he was (?), and he had such,
he was absolutely terrific 	 he is not a great singer, you
know, but the way, did you see it, no?
LOA No, I haven't seen it but...
L16: But if you, if you, the wa y he was using the stage, you know
walking and looking at the audience and really using the
audience; absolutely amazing piece of...tou know, acting, I
really...
Q: So again, what that brings us back to is the fact that it's
not just what's funny; there are all these other pleasures to
be gained...
116: Oh yes...
Q:	 other sorts of, you know, admiration of acting, performance,
character and so on...
L16: And...the other thing I like with Python, you know, in the
same scene, you can see the same actor dressed in different
ways, like in the jungle, you know, you see Eric Idle, he's
lost his leg, but he's dressed as a tiger...it's a kind of
bleasure, too, you know, it's (?) the total absurdity...
Q: Yes...I think that's, that's another thing that undercuts this
question we were talking about of possible sexism and the fact
that at one point Mr Creosote's vomiting over a cleaning
woman;
L16: But he vomits really...on John Cleese...
Q: Yes...and then also John Cleese picks up this bucket and...
somebody pointed out that that would be different if it wag.
a woman, if it was played by a woman...
L16: Could be, yes...
L13: That's true, yes...
Q: The fact that it's one of the Pythons in drag actually changes
the meaning of it, one actually can't talk about it being a
representation of, you know, women being treated in such a
way...
L16: ...yes...but I don't know, / can't help laughing in that scene
because, she is, you know, cleaning the floor and suddenl y she
is talking, she was at the Prado and the British Museum and
the Academie Francaise, and the other one Is probably...the
waiter has got fed up, and he put all the ...( laughing)...
that's why I laugh, you know, because...she's just doing some
cheap philosophy, you know, and...
Q: Well, no, it's because she says 'I never worked for Jews'...
LI6: (laughing)...yes, I..I know,...maybe s ometimes you laugh,
and you should feel, not sorry or guilty but...it could
happen, you know...
L13- : Well (we) said that there's a lot of pleasure to be derived
just from seeing someone having, not necessarily a bucket of
vomit, but just a...bucket of any, of paint or anything,
emptied all over them..t.
Q: ...like slipping on a banana-skin
L13: Yes, any simple slapstick style of comedy
L16: ..it's like a	 yes, it's like, you know, you can watch, this
famous Laurel and Hardy, you know, they fight with all the
cakes and cream and everything, and it's, you cam...
Q: ..custard pies...
L16: ,,,custard pies, you can see it a hundred times, you still
will laugh, you know...
Q: Yes...a bit less maybe but, yes...I mean there is a, again
somebody has written about the fact that in that situation,
there are three sort of ways of looking at it; you can either
- it's a complicated model, but you can either see it, get a
humorous response, or You can get a sympathetic response, in
which basically you'll be sdrry for the person, or else you
have a scientific response, you'll try to work out why they
fell over, or you'd be a doctor sort of trying to attend to
what's wrong, or something like that...
L16: Well I'm sure there is a reason, you know, why you laugh...
like the other think, you know, when you see, sorry to get
out of Monty Python but in Laurel and Hardy, when they come
and they start to...to, you know, they want to talk to someone
in a house and they,- OK	 he (?); so they start breaking the
house, he's breaking their car, and I mean...it's a kind of
build-up, and you shouldn't laugh, it's not really funny, when
you say it, but the way it's done...the aggressivity; maybe
you, you release Your own ag...I've no idea why you...
Q: I think there's, I mean one of the Freudian things is that
pleasure in that kind of comic is comparing how you, what
energy you would expend...
L16: ...yes, if you were...
Q: ..with the, how wrong the energy is that somebody else is
expending, either not enough or too much, so it's a sort of
suneriority...that's Freud's explanation of that kind of
thing...
Oh yes, something we haven't raised, um 000 I mean we may
not get anywhere but...talking about finding things funny, I
mean the classic thing is a joke, I mean we can laugh at
jokes; does it, what does it mean to you to talk about jokes
in relation to a film like this?
L16: I don't understand...
Q: Well...I mean in...Freud distinguishes between jokes and the
comic, and in sort of everyday speech, the joke is something
that somebody tells; one tells a joke to somebody, and they
laugh...and there is a psychoanalytic model for how that joke
is constructed because, actually one tells the joke to
somebody who's, one would like to be sexually aggressive
towards, someone who's not there; but because one can't do
that that is displaced onto the joke, and one tells that to
a third person, and that's the Freudian sort of model...
telling a joke; can one actually talk in thbse terms...do you
see what I mean? There is a difference between hearing somebody
tell a joke, laughing or not laughing, and what's going on in
a film, what's the kind of comie...
L16: You mean the visual, the visual joke and the one which is...
L13: It's much more, I think that film has much greater 	 I mean
there's a, it's a twoway process, isn't it, someone can tell
me a fairly indifferent joke and I will kind of laugh at it
because...it will be kind of more infectiously funny, even
though it actually isn't very funny...
Q: Well, mean the structure is quite different, you're in a
position where you hear something from somebody and you, you
respond..and that structure can be still there in a film, in
a si;se t. Imean...if you've got somebody telling a joke, you can
respond to it, but is there, is there any other way in which
in Plenty Python for instance, in Meaning of Life, there might
be things which make you laugh in the same way...
L16: Well, one...Michael Palin is talking at the end, you know,
sitting in the, there's nothing visual, he's saying something,
I didn't understand everything what he said, but it makes jrou
laugh, lremember he was (?)...that's a kind of joke, OK we
see him but there's no eqiivalent on the screen of the joke,
you know, he is only saying something...or like when they are
all like fishes inside the aquarium".
Q: Right...well perhaps, unless you've got any other ...I've
covered everything that...
L13: I'm not quite sure how this performed in the end but did it
do as well as the other Pythmn movies?
Q:I don't know actually...the impression I get is that it
didn't, but that's only an impression...In fact I mean there
are a couple of, there are a couple of books been written...
(gap, section not recorded)...
yes, let's get back to a bit of violence.,,
L13: Yes, series 2 of The Young Ones, in which, I can't remember
now, the skinhead radical student, what's his name?
Q: Vivian...
L13: ...Vivian, yes, geti decapitated by a train, you know, his
head falls off, kind of they kick his head around...when I
first saw it I just sort of rolled around laughing...I mean
it's not as gruesome as some of this...but that's kind of
completely unmotivated	 I don't know, I've got very dubious
unconscious motives (for liking that)
Q: Well no, there's clearly an audience, I mean there is obviously
an audience for that, and, I was looking at a book by David
Morley called 'Family Television', and he did some interviews
with families in Amer...in London, and there was clearly a
sort of class distinction, although it wasn't a very big
sample, he did detect, you know, that sort of class/'income
distinction, the people who did like or liked watching The
Isans,j1n_le., which implied that there was, I mean you needed
to have something that other people, you know, in lower
income categories or education categories didn't have access
to...or else it was a question of status...
L13: ...it was in the sort of Monty Python area, rather than...
Q: Well they were talking about The Young Ones...in particular...
L13: Yes, but...because that struck me as in a sense more down-
market, as it were, aimed for a broader audience or something..
Q: Yes, but they noticed that...he young 	 	  that...it was the
..C1's rather than the C2's and the D's...
L13: ...and Race as well actually, again that, I've shown that to
a few people, who were really offended by some of it...I think
Alexei Sayle does various sort of impersonations as a kind of,
there's a bit with...
Q s	African...
L13: ...there's a South African one, there's, at the end, I mean
Alexei Sayle does, in the last episode, does an impersonation
of a Jewish landlord, he kind of comes in, he slashes up all
the furniture, and charges them E200 (?).,.and that sort of...
I actually didn't, Imean I sort of laughed along with it, but
I showed it to a couple of Jewish people, and they got kind of
really, they were actually really pissed off by this, and it
just hadn't really occured to them at all...
Q: Well I think you've got, yes you've got other problems of
what is racist and what, tou know, who defines what racism
is, I mean...you've got a hierarchy of whether it's OK to be
racist about, about black people, and whether it's OK to be
racist about Jews...politics comes into it very much there,
doesn't it...
Right, shal we	 wind up...
TAPE 5: L6.L22.123 
Q: ..generally and specifically...I've got a few particular
points I'd like to raise, but I mean if we start off talking
generally about the film, comedy, Monty Python...first of all
some responses, I mean either... you haven't seen it before
(1,23) you didn't sound sure at the beginning, either, you
know, firsttime viewing or...your responses this time and,
perhaps, about the first time you saw it as well...
L22: I think I found it slightly funnier the first time I saw it.
Q: When was that?
L22: When it first came out. '83? But I remember not creasing
myself laughing the first time round...and I found some of
the sections funnier than others...I found the first section
funniest (Crimson Permanent Assurance)
L6: Yes I definitely thought it was funnier when I saw it the
first time; I think I remembered the...the Mr Creosote sketch
really did crease me when I saw it at the cinema, but I mean
that's, it's one of those things that you can only laugh like
that when you see it the first time; the second time you know
what's happening, so it's not so funny...but, looking at It
now, you know when I saw it at the time I didn't know what I
thought about it, but I think it's definitely one of their,
it's actually almost a serious film, for them...
L6: I cosyou know, they are, they weren't just trying to be funny
...(?) but I don't think they were trying to be, you know,
literally hysterical; I think they were trying to be a bit
more contem...you know, contemplating things...
Q: Yes, Y es	 what were your first responses?
L23: Well, I don't think I'd have gone to see it voluntarily...I
wasn't very keen on the thing...I found the section with
schooling, I think, the nearest thing to reasonably Tunny;
the others funny In patches but as a tihoit r cat say E Litedl
the film:
Q: Yes...I haven't looked at the questionnaires, but what did
you put about Monty Python?
L23: Well I had seen the first couple of original series, I think,
yes the first two series, then I sort of missed after that,
I just found it increasingly unfunny...and I think I've seen
two or three of the films you mentioned, (?) but,..Time
Bandits I think you had down...so I have seen some of their
films but, but this one I didn't really get on with, I mean
all the, like the Mr Creosote sketch, and Live Donations I
just find that sort of gore overwhelms any humour in it...
there's...the impact or the shock of the idea that if you've
got a kidney card then someone's going to come and take your
kidneys, that initial thing's sort of fairly funny but then I
find all the spurting tomatouketchup gets a bit overwhelming:
L6: Yes, I agree, yes.
Qs Perhaps we can come back to that in a minute; I mean the point
that both of you raised in different ways about the fact that
the film is maybe less funny, or deliberately funny, perhaps,
than the television series...when you were filling in the
think during the film, I mean, was that a difficulty, the
very quebtion, is it, how funny is it?
L6: I think whaS t s difficult about the question is sort of, you
can actually say as you go through the film, well I found that
bit funnker than the bit I saw before, but I put'2' for that
and I don't thinkpit's unfunny so I've got to put'2' again...
L22: The grading in your own mind is quite diflficult
L23: Probably easier to do it in retrospect... (agreement)...
L6: ...although I suppose your mood can be altered by what you've
seen before, because you might be a bit more receptive after,
you know if you really enjoyed the beginning, it might sort of
draw you in more...
Q: That's right; I think also that, I mean this should come
through now, in a way, that what's obviously missing in a
sort of thing like that Is the fact that wi ..thin one sectign
you might actually find one thing really hilarious, 	 at lasts
for two minutes, and the rest of it not very funny, and that
doesn't necessarily come through there...What I was actually
getting at as well was a point several people have made, about,
somebdy said that the...the first section, the Crimson
Permanent Assurance, they didn't find at all funny but they
really enjoyed it; does that make sense...
L23: Yes, 'cos again there was sort of incongruity which was
amusing to start with but it sort of gets a bit laboured
after a while; the idea of fighting with office stamps, and
things like that...
L6: It's very,..sort of ingenious, but you know the ideas were
very ingenious, that they used the mundane office equipment
and made it look like weapons of slavery or piratical
weapons but it sort of, it didn't make it extremely funny,
you sort of laughed at it...ingenuity...
L22: I found, I think, on that point, I also found it funny because
of the kind of genre that It's sending up, and I'm thinking
of Burt Lancaster and swashbuckling and all of that; and
little visual gags within it make Me laugh, I mean the fact
that the guy who'd got his bicycle chained to the side of the
building is desperately trying to unpadlock it while kind of
the building pulls away	 that makes me laugh...
Yes...' mean that makes you laugh, but I mean the point
somebody else was making was that they enjoyed things, I mean,
right...right.
this is the distinction, it's a problem, distitguishing things
that one likes and enjoys from things that one, that are
funny...I mean is there a...can we say some more about what
that problem could be...because as you said (L6) in a way the
film is not out and out comedy, and yet one can enjoy other
LS: Well Imean I think you, you...if you look at the film as a
whole you can say I didn't find it that funny but I did enjoy
it; and I mean for me, when I say funny I mean that I laughed
at it; and when I saw somethin g spontaneous, it caused me to
laugh, whereas just because you didn't laugh didn't mean that
you didn't enjoy it, which, you know I think I did enjoy
watching it.
I'd say the opposites I didn't enjoy the film, but bits of it
were funny...sort of a reverse thing...
That's interesting; I mean, I'll put it specificall to you,
(L23), one of the things that people said they enjoyed was the
pleasure of say the performances in some places, you know liki
recognizing sort of John Cleese and...that's actually
pleasurable, Perhaps...
L23: Yes...and I would have said the same for the aspects of
incongruity; surreal parts of it, I'm not sure, but I found
the sort of overwhelming tenor of the gore and the puking and
so on , just sort off ovmrwhelmed by it...
L6: I think also something that distinguishes Monty Python, from
television to cinema, is that...that was directed by Terry
Gilliam, wasn't it?...Imean he's got, he's a very sort of
powerful film director, he makes things very watchable, and
that's where sort of I think that films sort of built on the
television series sort ofliiPsome ways surpassthem because of
that visual filmic skill that comes through...
L23: It was harking back all the time to the television format,
wasn't it, all the graphics and things...
L6: Some of it, but you tend to get thate in most of the sort of
sketchlike Monty Python films, which that was a return to,
whereas (?) had sort of stories...
Q: You're talking about preduction values as well...there's more
care...
L6: ..and more money...
Q: ...paid top_ yes, the visual look of the whole think, yes
L6: But actually, I think when you were talking about character-
istics of Monty Python, I think in the end that...that scene
with the fish thing, when_ they were talking abotitt 'where's
the fish?', spot the fish, I mean that was the, almost sort
of, that's the sort of Monty Python that I remember from the
television series, and yet it was, I almost found it, I just
thought it was rubbish...I didn't, you know, I mean that
wasn't something,- I hadn't thought about that in terms of the
television programmes before, but you know, it almost seemed
to me to be very schoolboyish sort of humour, and I didn't
really like that bit at all, it wasn't very good...
Q: Yes, what did anybody else think of that particular sequence?
Because it does stand out a bit in terms of the rest of the
film...
L23: I can't remember it...
Q: 'I wonder where the fiih has gone'.,.
L6: Yes, and they had the long arms, and...
L23: Oh, yes, that wawr one of my complete score zeros...
L6: ...that's what I thought...
L22: Yes.
L6: graham Chapman in his suspenders and bustle...
Q: I, mean I see, I know exactly what you mean, that it came
nearest to being the surreal dada type stuff of some of the
television, but it, at the same time wars quite different...
the other thing of course that's missing is the animation,
except for the title credit sequence...
L6: But there's the trees bit as well...
Qs The trees...that's right, yes
L6: There are
L23: This whole thing of the office building turning into a ship,
I mean that all seems to relate to it, it's not actually
animated but...(agreement)
L6: Instead of having to be confined to paper they could...again,
because of production values...
L23: ...big models...
Q: Umm...can we go back to what you raised (L23) about the, as
you say the gore and the guts and the puking and everything,
um. I wasn't watching you personally, but I mean most people
and at least some of you nevertheless did laugh when that
comes on; most people, at least, whether they like it or not,
do respond, by laughing, to a sequence like Mr Creosote; I mea
do you, as 'say, I wasn't looking or anything, but you don't
feel you did at all, (L23)...
L23: Well, the.. .as I say, again, the initial incongruity of someofl.
g restaurant and saying thcoming into a plushlookin g
ings like
'fuck off I'm full'; I found that amusing (General quiet
laughter), but the idea of people becoming covered in vomit
just didn't get to me at all; and in the, again in the Live
Organs, as I say, the initial idea, extremely funny, you
know, you get one of these cards from the library and then
the squad might descend on you, but I don't want to see the
detail of it...
L6: I think that was a really...badly...a bad scene, about that,
not a bad scene: I mean the scene was bad, just the way that
was handled and everythin g...as much as I quite :Sten tend to
laugh at those things, I didn't for that one...
Q: ..the Live Organ Transplant
L6: yes, the Live organ Transplant, I think, I think it was very,
it was quite unfunny and there was an idea there and yet it
hadn't, it wasn't very well developed or very well executed;
and the idea of that, he went down to the library and, and
they, they were straight after him, you didn't really, that
didn't really come across very well, I don't think; I actually
sort of...that's the hearest I think I got to thinking, well
that's very gratuitous, and I don't normally think that often
that violence is that gratuitous when I see it, but I did
actually in that scene, I thought well what's the point, you
know?
Q: Yes I mean what I'm getting at is that whether it's gratuitous
or not, strictly speaking, I think the response often is still
to, there's a kind of shock, there's a laughter of shock
perhaps...
L23: I think also, I'm sure it's deliberate 'cos you know in the
end, when he's saying what people want to see in the cinema
these days is people with chainsaws cutting people up, so...
I'm sure that was part of it...
L22: Yes, yes ...I think what you were saying, I think goes for a
lot of the sketches, the initial idea for me is very funny,
but a lot of the rest of it is kind of surplus to requirement,
it's not actually neededto make me laugh, though I can find it
enjoyable...
L23- : I found that when I stopped watching Hythpn on TV, you know
the first two series seemed to have a lot of original funny
stuff in, then I found you'd get one or two good jokes, and
very thinly spread...
L22: The premises are very very funny...
Q: Is that...could that also be to do wcith, I mean another
question, another type of question, could that also be to do
with getting used. to that type of humour...
L23: I don't think so...' think it did change in character, I meant
'cos I remember, as I say there seemed to be a clear differencl
In my mind between the first and second series, where it all
seemed very new, and then it just seemed to be, they had the
same characters each time, and you're expected to find funny
them doing the same thing, Find it hardto artioulate...they
seemed to sort of latch onto a catchphrase each programme,
and spend sort of quarter of an hour working through that,
and it just didn't seem to have the appeal of.the earlier
mcufbeQ: ...and you felt the early programmes A weren't doing that, yes,
they weren't actually...
L23: I suppose, it could be, as you sa y , it was just it seemed new
at the time, but I think there genuinely was sore variety of
stuff in the earlier series...
Q: There's 000 I mean that raises another sort of thing; there are
two types of, I thing I mentioned this maybe in the courses
can't remember, two types of pleasure, kwo kinds of comedy,
one is the pleasure of repetition, and the other's the pleat:111re
of something new...which I suppose can conflict...in a sense
what you're referring to there is the pleasure of the new, I
mean you know, it's refreshingly new at the beginning,
L23: ...I suppo se s o p Yes...
Qs ..whereas, and other people may take some pleasure, or have
taken pleasure in Meaning of Life from the recognition of
something that's familiar, the performance.
L22: Also within the film, what I found enjoyable and pleasurable
but not funny was the beginning of one scene leading In from
the, on from the end of another one, I mean the Heaven
sequence where they in fact...go, they arrive, all these
people who die from the salmon mousse arrive in heaven, and
the people in front of them in the queue are people from a
previous sketch...
Q: Yes, which is a nice idea
L22: Yes, which Is ingenious but not necessarily funny.
L6: That question of sort of recognition...just sort of...you do
tend to know the characters so well that one almost doesn't,
you know, think about that, or I didn't think about that, I
just (knew) what they're like, and I didn't gain any extra
pleasure from seeing the same sort of characterisations
again...they were just them...so I didn't, it didn't
automatically spring to mind...
Q: Umm, it does seem that all three of you, or the general
impression I get, is that the first section or the section en
Birth, sex education and so on was the funniest...for all of
you? or
L6: Yes it was for me, the first sketch, the Birth one, in the
hospital, I really liked that one, I thought it was very good;
that had sort of all the good ingredients, sort of irreverence,
the way the y (?)...and just the way they sort of ridiculed
the system, the hospital sort of s y stem, and doctors and the
Establishment...That had sort of, it had all the bits of
ingredients, you know like it had a little bit of gore with
the baby, than it was all, you know, not too much, but it was
just rights just a good mixture of things...just appealed to
me I think...
Q: But it...has it also got something to do, to be-SOO provocative:
has it also got something to do with the fact that the first
section, broadly speaking, La to do with sex? Childbirth, then
'Every Sperm is Sacred', the Protestant talking about sex for
pleasure...
L22: ..the fact that we find it funny
Q: ...sex education...yes. Or is it other things to do with
writing, timing,..
L6: I think...I mean the sex does tend to be, it always brings
laughs, and it always is...funny but I think that within just
that section I mean I enjoyed the Birth one which I think is
less,was less sex-related than the other sections but I mean
it was, the other sections were still slightly funnier than
than the rest of the film...' think sex is so much a Part of
comddy that, that you can have a sort of bad sexuallyoriented
sketch, and you might laugh at it; but I mean you know, it's
just another aspect of humour, just because it's sex doesn't
make it any more taboo or any more funny 	 any more, anyway,
I think...because it's, it's been dealt with over quite a lot
of things...
Q; Let's come back to that in a second...how do you (L22/23)
respond to what I've just said?
L6: Me?
Q: No the others, I'm sorry...
1,22: I suppose, yes...I sippose I'm partly laughing at that and
pa...again, in the 'Every Sperm is Sacred', I'm thinking of
Oliver and I'm thinking of the musical genre, laughing at the
_sendingup of that	 as well...That's predominantly why I
found it funny; the fact that they're singing 'Every Sperm is
Saored'...(?)...
Q: What about the religious aspect of...
L23: Oh...any poking at religion is always good for a laugh with me
(/aughter) I think also, I can't remember, what came after the
school scene?..go into...
Q: It goes into the rugby...rugby game and then the lecture by
Graham Ojiapman, a brief lecture about the need for an army,
and then the sergeantmajor marching up and down...
L23: Ri ght... s cos I think, for me, sort of after that, you started
getting the 	 I found objectionable, like the Live Organs...
Q:	 and then the Zulu_ war...
L23: And then there's what?
Q: And then the Zulu war.
L23: Oh that's right, yes, that was...a bit of history; I think,
for me, you were saying, why do we find the earlier parts
funny, for me, it would be having to have the unpleasant part,
so it was just more pleasurable...though it was funny...
Q: So you would, you would say the...the blood and gore and guts
Part literally sort of put you off...
L231 Yes...I think so...If that had ha ppened in the earliest, in
the first scene, that would of coloured my view of the entire
films
Q: Yes, yes. Let's come back to, I mean, something that you just
said, (L), that struck me; you said...I can't remember your
words, but first of all you said well sex usually manages to
raise a laugh, you said something like that... u sed very often..
L6: Km...yes, I contradicted myself...(laughs)...
Q: ..yes...and then you alsm said that well, yes it's a very
common subject in humour, in comedy, so because it's so
everyday and common, it doesn't necessarily mean it's going
to be funny...
L6: Yes, yes, what I meant was...
Q: ...seems to contradict...
L6: Yes, it does slightly, but...I'll try and clarify-that, say
I'm a politicitn now...(laughter)...what I meant was, was that
qiite often sex is dealt with in comedy and sometimes it's
funny, sometimes it's not, but just the fact that it's sex
doesn't mean that it's necessarily funny...
Q: Doesn't mean it's necessarily funny...
L6: yes...that is the fact that it's being raised doesn't mean
it's necessarily funny, which I think was the point you were,
you were trying to say that you thought that, maybe that
people do react in that way...
Q: ..which you, you did seem to imply yourself when you said that
if you deal with sex then it usually...
L6: Yes...I mean, so probably it's more likely to be...dealt
humorously with, bu3t I mean like, say, for example, Benny Hill,
I mean, you know, everything is supposed to, is more or less,
most of his comedy is based on sex, but I would sit there and
watch it and I wouldn't laugh at all...
Q: ..which raises the quistion of audience, of course...What,
if we could sort of take a detour, what sort of audience do
you think, how do you think of the audience of Honty Python?
ingeneral...
L6: I think it's youth oriented, sort of...(?) probably up to
about...thirty, maybe more, you can't sort of generalize
totally but I mean quite often students or...it's student
sort of humour
Q: Do you think...is it that now? or	 has it changed withtime?
L23: 'Cos presumably it's people who were in that category when the
first things cane out and have been following it since...
L6: Tes,that's right, that's right so I mean obviously you know
there are people who've grown up with...(?)...But I think that
would be...you won't get people liking it who, who didn't like
it first time, I don't think you'll find people, as they get
older, deciding they like it, it's going to be the other way
round, it'll appeal to, it'll have younger people,appealing,
enjoying that sort of humour...
L22: ...for the first time...
L6: Yes, first time, rather than, so it' s, you know, be perenniall:
for young people, sort of comedy with...
Q: Yes; although of course now we've got The Young Ones,(?)...
and 1111 that...
L6: q ..whether they're doing anything radically different is
not really, I don't think...
Q: Not radically different, in the sense that because it's, it's.
L6: ...it's just a continuation...
Q : ...in the same sort of strand; maybe young people having seen
Comic Strip and The Young Ones might see Monty Python and say
oh well, you know, it's just the same sort of stuff only old
fashioned...
Umm...yes. Let's come back to this thing about sex: Becaus
I still want to pursue it a little bit further, in the sense
that just mentioning, I mean do you feel, taking into acount
the discussion of audience and who's watching, do you feel
that sometimes just mentioning 'penis' or whatever would raise
a laugh? Do you think it happens in this film? Does it happen
elsewhere? For whom...
L23: I don't think so	 I think, you were talking about Benny Hill
but in, going back into older films, you know Carry On films
or whatever, and you mentioned dropped trousers or anything
like that, and theit's it, a laugh lined up (?)...but I think
in these jaded days it's not so automatic...
Q: You think it used to be more the case than it is now...
L23: Yes, j ust because it was more of a taboo area...so I don't
think it would atomatically (?) today...
L6: I think it depends who says it, as well, I mean,if you get,
you know like a film, you sort of expect it in a film like
Monty Python, you know any film like that...that there will be
mention of 'penis' or, or 'fuck' or whatever; but if somebody
who you don't expect to say a word like that says it, then it
can be funny; I think It's expectation as well. Or for exapmle
Jools Holland makes his "groovy fucker" cockup on, you know,
on kids' television; I mean, you find that funny, and also in
a way radical because like you're breaking the mould by saying
it...
Q: Where it, again you've got ' 0 A'emixtre between funny and
other kinds of pleasure...
L6: Yes..that's right.
Q: Yes...yes. When...we haven't really answered that question
sort of comprehensively, but another thing that goes with that,
L6: (?)...
Q:	 dare say it's impossible (laughter)...but what goes with
that is that obviously sometimes, then, another word for it
would be smut, might be funny, but then how much comedy does
smut need to carry with it for it do be funny? When does...
how little comedy is necessary for it to be funny? Have you
heard the Derek and Clive, you know Derek and Cleve stuff?
L6: Mm yes...
That was Peter Cook and Dudley Moore doing their Pete and Dud
sketches, doing their Pete and Dud characterisations; they had
a few drinks...it became extremely crude; I toyed with the
idea of using that sort of as part of this, as well, to see
how far people would accept that they go with just being
really 'crude', not really a good word, but...and the comedy
part tends to sort of recede and disappear, and in the end
it's just sort of sexual abuse, and is it funny any more? and
for whom...
L2,: From what I can remember...the humour in it, for me, wasn't
the sexual aspect, it was other things; the only sketch I can
remember is, they're two football supporters saying "Do you
know I saw Hobby the other day, and he called me a fucking
cunt" "No: Fucking cunt SO what did you do?" "Oh I called him
a fucking cunt:" "Quite right"...
Q: ...and it goes on...
L23;..and it was just they were showing, all that showed was like
impoverishment of language when people just sort of saytk eat the whole time, and it's not, I don't think it's the sort
of the sexual aspect that's coming out there...' can't remembc
what the other sketches on that one were...
L22: But also I mean there's this sense in which Monty Python is
sending up that aspect; it says 'penis'and 'fuck'; it's not
saying it in the spirit with which some of the people who say
it find it funny...
Q: Yes, yes...I think that's ri#ht...
L6: Yes, if you sort of go back to the school sketch, I mean if
you think about it it...the way they were discussing things,
I mean it...it wasn't exactly meant to be humorous, I mean it
was all, almost, the way I saw it anyway, is that they were
sayin g well you know here you have a school lesson to talk,
supposed to talk about sex education and they don't actually
talk about sex; I think it was trying to mate a point, that,
you know, how ludicrous sex education is and how ludicrous
this British sort ofness of pompous Brits, as Death said
later on, you know, that, you know, that we're, British people
are just so afraid of sex, and it is so taboo, and it can't
be discudsed, you know mean like, I always think that's quite
a serious sketch, because it's saying that, you know, we can't
even educate our children in sexual.sexuality.
Q: ...and it's also, Yes, the peculiar thing is that it's clearly,
that particular sketch clearly is also meant to be funny...
L6: Yes, yes...it is...
Q: ...so it's doing both at the same time...
L6: ...yes, that's right, but...it's better that it is...
Q: o...in the beginning of the Mr Creosote sequence when Eric
Idle sitge the Penis Song, what, what is the laughter at the
beginning of that...because I noticed that with almost every
group that's done this, as soon as, you know, he's there,
"Isn't it nice to have a penis.", there is laughter,
immediately; so where does that dome from?
L6: Well I think it's, well obviously he's trying to do Noel
Coward, so...part of it is the idea of Noel Coward singing
that, and...and almost, you could almost imagine him singing
it, if he was perhaps alive today, I don't know...
Q: ..if he was doing a Derek and Clive...(laughter)...
L6: ...and so...part of it would be that, sort of the character
that you recognize, that you don't hear in that situation,
doing that; and...
L23: I think most of the humour is over the audience's reaction,
'Oh, what a witty song: I ...not thinking about it at all, it's
just like, another one.
L6: I think there's something more to that, actually, as well,
that again is saying something about ..,I can't really place
it, but it's something like that the British are so sort of
I don't know obliv either oblivious or...ot that they, yes,
I think it's a matter that they don't understand subtleties,
you know, and that they were trying, obviously that wasn't
subtle, but that's what it was trying to say, that if, if you
said something to...if you said somuthing or if you sung
something that was subtly irreverent, quite often a lot of
people wouldn't sort of understand what was going on
* Oult
 don't
 I've put that very well but there's something a;
that, I think there was more to it than just...
L22: It's, I mean it's also to do with anything to retain the, you
know, retain the status quo, isn't it,...
L6: Yes, that's it,...yes, Yee..
L22: ...so even if they have understood, they pretend they didn't;
you know what I mean...pretend they haven't understood, and
everything was really all right and this is Noel Coward
singing a (?) sophisticated song...
Q: ...which is what that...that table that leaves durin g the
meal is doing in a sense,.
L22: Yes, yes, exactly...(agreement)...
Q: 'The meal was fine, yes' (laughter)
L6: Yes, that's right...
Q:  ..and the response when she says "I'm having my period"...
So...something that's related to that, umm...laughing at, well,
our attitudes to sex...can we, under what cicumstances do we
lau gh at or find funny things which we might object to, in
theory? Issues such as racism or sexism or 	 things that we
think, oh, I don't really want to find that funny...I shouldn't
be laughing at that.., either in The Meaning of Life or
elsewhere; clearly there are times when, you know, I've heard
a racist joke or something and...I don't want to hear thisl...
but having heard it sort of smile and think, yes, I suppose
it's quite clever. Does this film do that at all? or...
L22: There's as there's a moment just after the Zulu wars, where a
guy walks on in a Zulu suit, unzips it and it is in fact an
immaculate white guy in a suit, and then speaks with a, with
an African accent; which I didn't think was funny, but I think
like you, it even crossed my mind, as regards you to that
scene, that maybe I shouldn't be laughing at it...but I found
it quite inge...again, ingenious, clever. But not necessorily
funny, I don't think I did find it funny...actually...
L6: Thewe's also the, there's the guy who's sentenced to death
for being gratuitously sexist, and there was the woman who's
talking about leaving the British Museum and working for a
dirty Jew, and then he poured the bucket of sick over her
head...
Q: She didn't say dirty Jew...
L6: 4,-..(?)...it's all right, I can say it, 'cos I'm Jewish...
(laughter)... working for a Jew, sorry, I didn't mean to be
bad shit, it's the dirty vomit compared to...so obviously
they were trying to say something about it, but...they were
trying to bring in something to do with racism, sexism, within
the humour and maybe, they were almost maybe making a statement
that, you know, because they were saying that, even though
they were stooping to the levels of racism and sexism, they
were saying that it was maybe slightly wrong...'cos, because
they poured a bucket of vomit over her head and because the
guy who jumped, who had been convicted had to jump off the
cliff, you know...
L23: Da you think having...
L6: ...but that doesn't mean that they're not exploiting it...
L23;: Yesphaving said that this guy was guilty of the making of a
gratuitously sexist joke, like it then gives them the excuse
to have shots of women, boobs flying all over the place, so
perhaps_that's giving them licence to do that, kind of, if
they hadn't had that beforehand, you'd think mm, nasty sexist
imagery, but (?) because he's chosen it as his punishment, so
Q: On the one hand, as L6 says, it still is, but then is it
necessarily, because I mean in a sense if they say that, it
does mean something...it complicates the issue, certainly,
in one's response to it.
L23': There's always this thing with Monty Python as well that many
of the major women characters are in fact, I'm not sure which
two it is in drag, I'm sure that's something, says something
to do with their sexis* attitudes...
L6: Maybe they like dressing up in women's clothes...says more
about their sexual attitudes maybe than their sexist ones...
especially Graham Chapman, I think (laughter)
Q: There's a lovely quote...I don't have to say this, but I mean
there's an interview with Graham Chapman where he says
something like 'I'm sure that boys and girls, there's no such
thing as boys and girls, there aren't only two sexes, only
two genders or two sexes, everybody should be able to choose
which gender or sex they want to be'...he goes over the top a
bit about that...everybody can choose whether they want to be
male or female...
L23: That gets thrown in in the hospital sketch, doesn't it, when
she has the baby, is it a boy or a girl?...don't impose your
roles on it now (laughter)
L6: Yes, that's quite good...
Q: But that, that's an interesting point, though, I mean whether
it is sexism or not...it's interesting that you said that it
is sexist; because some people have argked that the fact that
it Is...I mean, there's another question, is the fact that
there are just six men working together and obviously some
sketches with women in have to occur...
L23: Well there used to be...on the TV series you used to have,
the only real woman in it was Carol Cleveland4 who'd sort of
come on as a dumb pinup type, the only other women in it were
these people in drag, I remember there was a lot of controversy
with the first series that the images of women were all highly
dubias...
Q: What some people suggested is that the fact that it is men in
drag playing women and not women themselves actually changes
the meaning of it...
L23: Sm it's all right for men in drag to portray women as stupid
and ugly and...
Q: Well...I don't know if people say well it's all right to, but
it certainly make, the argument more complicated than if it
simply was a woman being vomited over, for instance...
L23: Deconstructing stereotypes...yes.
L6: But also, Ithink, it's also this British, I mean like
Britishness is...you know really central as well; because
they're always, they're always ridiculing the upper classes
and yet they,they are, they come from that sort of well
educated system and they're ridiculing it, and they seem to
even in ridiculing it they seem to adopt the same sort of
attitudes sexual attitudes that they, that that system
represents, like what we see in Personal Service, you know,
we all know about, you know sort of judges in drag all the
time, and it's just they just still in a way continuing that
because...they just found another outlet, because they can de
it on telly instead; but yet they're still, they're trying to
ridicule it as well, but they're reinforcing it as well.	 .
Q: But then yes, given their, their background and their origins,
it's impossible to expect them to do anything else, having
been through Oxford and Cambridge...what can one expect, there
are limitations to the type of humour they can produce...There
are a couple of people in the other groups who said that well
they they found that they didn't find it disturbing, women
have slid...in groups have said that they didn't actually find
it disturbing...the gender stereotypes being portrayed...
Let's just have a look and sea if there's anything else...
We've covered most of the things I wanted to talk about. Oh yes,
I mean what...I was going to just ask you about, I mean what
effect do you think watching it here in this context has in
relation to happening to, happening to, say it was on television
it was on, with somebody else, you happened to see it again,
planned to go and see it at the cinema or...
L6:Ithink it does affect...watching it here with, I mean, obviously
we don't know each other very well so sometimes that does affect
how you, you know you react to something, I think always when
people are in an audience, if somebody laughs they may be more
likely to laygh as well...
L22: It's also the fact that something is expected of you...
(short gap)
L6: ...yes, you're thinking about the, what's going on on the
screen in terms of maybe what you may be asked later, so it,
that's not necessarily different to, 'cos I always, when I'm
watching things anyway, think about what's going on...but I
think perhaps where It's more affected is, say if you're sitting
in a cinema you can sit with strangers because of the darkness
and 'because you're anonymous, and so you can react the way you
want to, whereas if you're sitting in a rhom with some other
people that you don't know very well, you may actually feel,
you know, that it's difficult to laugh, or to be the first to
laugh, in case other people don't find it funny...
Q: I think that's right, yes...And the fact that it's part of a
sort of experiment, yes...
L23: I think we're mature enough to-li't that not affect our viewing
skills
Q: Well...
L22: I don't know think it does, in some way; I don't know if it
affects my viewing skills, but it affects me as a viewer of the
fibs rather than, I know it would be different if I was sitting
at home wajtching it.
Q: It may not affect what you think of the film, but it may affect
how you respond to it, which may be something different. And
I'm not sire, in a sense, you know I'm interested in both, I
suppose...
L23: I think the only thing for me, as I said earlier, I wouldn't
have seen it (laughs)...under voluntary circumstances...
L6: I think that's something about humour as well, that you cant
you know certain people, *ou know it's just you know, taste in
humour, certain people like certain things and not others; but
also if you're in a peer group, you know that you're all in
tune to what your humour is, so there are things that you can
wOrk off each other, but if you're, if you're just with people
that you don't know very well, sometimes things that would be
funny somewhere else just don't, don't work, because of
people's attitudes towards humour or...
Q: There was somebody, I think...it was (L13) who was on the
course as well, he said the first time he saw it, he went with
somebody, no he didn't, he saw it with his father, and he said,
oh, you ought to see this, I don't know why he said that, but
anyway, (laughter).../this is good, let's watch this' and, and
after .'a while he started feeling quite embarassed...why did I
suggest watching this?, you know, and it really inhibited him;
and he said that watching it the second time here, he actually
enjoyed it more, because even though he'd seen it before, it
way, he actually felt it as being a more (?) situation...
L23: ...freedom
Q: ..so it's a comparative thing, isn't it, how free It is
compared with other situations...
L23. : I've quite often experienced that as well when I've pressganged_
someone into going to see a film which I really like, and you
cone out afterwards and they say oh, what's the fuss about?:
and you're sort of sitting there trying to defend it...
Q: Right.. .if :there's nothing else, of burning importance...
TAPE 6: L5.102.104 
Q: I've got a few specific points that, you know, I'd like ti get
through, but we can start off just talking about general
impressions...what you liked, what you didn't like, what...
any Particularly strong initial impressions...
1.5: I hadn t t seen the film before...I'd heard about the sketch at
the end, the second to last sketch, sorry, the expanding man
who blows ups and that was very funny, but I thought a lot of
the other stuff was moderatel y...ftnny, almost disappointing,
from what I was perhaps expecting.
Q: I noticed a lot of hilarity, 1 mean, did you all find that was
the funniest sketch? sketch, well the funniest part...
L12: No, I didn't think that was the funniest...
L14: Well you laugh because you're shocked...
L12: ...well it was so revolting, it was that...you know, you don't
even like to look at it, for fear of...
L5: ...how do you measure, I mean maybe that was funny, we laughed
a lot, but to measure the humour of laughter, how...
L12: Well I don't know how you measure humour...
L5: yes...interest (?)...
L12: I mean I think that's a very hard thing, to actually ring a
number on that anyway, because it's very actually hard to, to
recognize in yourself what you particularly find funny; we
don't tend to stop and analyse humour...I mean I thought it
was very funny but I thought it was quite revolting, it was a
kind of horror, it was a kind of mixture of 'yeucch t dread and
I actually felt quite nauseous at one point...
L14: ...Yes...
L12: ...and I thought if he pukes again I really, I can't look
because it's making me want to vomit actually (others agreeing)
..not strongly, but I started to feel a bit nauseous...
But that didn't stop you laughing.
No, but it was laughing at the horror, it was the horrific
kind of revoltingness...
L5: ...I wouldn't say it was horror, I mean it was, it was, it was
too, it Was too...
L12: ...well you know, the revoltingness of it...
L5: ...it was sort of revolting, there was some suggestions (?)..,
it was very funny	 his whole body (?).../ mean I think that
that sort of deflated that, the horror of the vomit, quite a
lot; I thought actuall y it was funny...
Q: w h a t ...You ' d seen it before...did you
L 14: Yes...I dreaded that bit...because I remember when I firstt saw
it in the cinema, I remember the whole cinema going (vomit
sound) (laughter) v.. because it's so horrible: It's revolting,
it is
L5: it's funny...we sound even worse: ( laughter cbntinuing)
L12: Yes but it's revolting at the same time...
L 14: I think, I think it is a defensive type of laughter at that One
L12: ...yea, yes",
Q: ...for instance it's interesting that I mean you three did
respond much more actively to that, I mean you were laughing
and...the other groups that have been here, sort of didn't
respond to it all that much, I'm not sure why...
L5: I think there's a lot of that sort of humour around now, with
peop...or just the past couple of years, I think it's dropping
off lately, but with the, you know gligLiquaLials_ and...humour
centred around sort of, I don't know how to describe it,
graphic slapstick, shall we say,
102: ...bodies
,L5: ...bodt functions...
Q. ...Filthy Rich and Catflan...
L5: ..and...well, and previous to that l'he Young Ones, and Ben
Elton on his standup routines, you know, he's done something,
he did an amazing routine on Saturday Night Live a couple of
months ago on, talking about women's periods, talking about
periods, which was quite, I mean I was shocked, I mean I
shouldn't have been, I'm ideologically sound, I shouldn't have
been, but...and he Was really drilling it home...
L 12: what because someone could talk about that on television...
L5: Yes...I know, I know the whole purpose, the whole purpose of...
L12: and you're making into a comddy sketch...
L5: yes, no, I was shocked because I wasn't expecting, I'd like to
think I was shocked because I wasn't expecting even Ben Elton
to do it here, on television; you know, if r go to a cabaret
say in London, it's on Saturday night, I wouldn't be so
shocked...but I think to actually see it on the screen, was
quite surprising. I like to think that maybe I was shocked for
the reasons you suggest...
Q: Yes, that idea of surprise or shock...did that operate at all,
that, I noticed you were quite, the early scenes about sex
ecucation and the Sperm Song; how did they go?
L12: Well I thought, I mean I liked that first bit, not the very
first bit, which I didn't think was very funny but the bit
about the birth and all that bit, but when I saw the Sperm song
I realized I'd seen it, I haven't seen the film before but I
r ealized I'd seen it reviewed on Barry Norman's Film11,whatever,
eightythree I suppose, and as I say I remembered (?)'...because
r emember watching it	 laughing at that, but it's, it's the
lack of, you know again it's the shock factor, isn't it, people
singing 'Every Sperm is Precious' and all this...and I liked
the, / liked the sex education lesson one as well...and I think
they poke fun very well at the school institution, they're
particularly good at that, and in the church; I thought that was
very funny as well...
L5: It seems like a very...' don't know how (?) a thing it is to
say, but I feel that the sort of school that they're using for
that scene is more to do with the sort of school they went to...
L12: Oh very much so...very much so...(L14 agreeing)
L5: ...ratlyer than anything else.
1,12: But I felt, I liked, I thought that was qtite funny, that 'Every-
Sperm is Precious' but it was just the parody was very clever
as well, it was like Oliver wasn't it...streets and everything;
but I think the thing is with, when you've seen a lot of Monty
Python stuff, it's very kind of selfreflective, 'cos you tend
to get, you tend to recognize the pattern of humout that you're
going into, and I was conscious that I was, at points I was
thinking, am I laughing because this is funny, or am I laughing
because it reminds me of...I mean, John Cleese as a waiter, or
in fact in the trenches, where he's kind of you know, 'that
fucking (?), it was just like that waiter sketch, you know, you
know where he comes in with the meat cleaver and says, 'How
dare you be rude about our food' and I thought, because they
so easily go into kind of parodies of characters they've done
before; what you tend to do is recognize that, and laugh because
it sets off something you recognize, that you laughed at before;
and therefore I think it's harder to find things that are new
to laugh at, I mean I was a little bit disappointed, I didn't
think it was/ hilariously funny...I didn't ring the...top...
Q:	 what was missing from...
L12:	 well I don't know really, 1 mean I didn't laugh as much as
I did when I first saw Monty Python, but a lot's changed, you
know, and I think your points were unfair, Ian...(L5)...sorrY;
which is that I think that because they set the whole thing off
really, in 1970, '69, whenever it was, that they just set a
whole new trendpand therefore now you've had all what's come
since, and recently there's like The Young Ones, that, with
you know with milkmen wandering around with cleavers in their
heads and...
L5:	 think...
L12: ...Filthy Rich and Catflav, that sort of thing, therefore you,
if when you go back to this sort of humour it doesn't have the
shockvalue it had originally...so it is dulled a bit, certain13
L5.1 I think it's also, it's passe really...
1,12: .,well that's what I'm saying, (?)...
L5: ...Monty Python, almost.. .1 felt very pass.. .1 remember watch:,
yes...' remember watching it when Iwas young, it was like,
almost like a treat, but it was quite a naughty thing to watch,
'cos it was on so late Sunday nights as I remember it, when it
first started...I used, I was only about nine or ten at the
time, or even eleven, Ican't remember, but...and it was, please,
can I stay up late, used to have to beg to be allowed to watch
it, because my big brother watched it	 and it was really
funny then and I went through, I went through the grammar
schools as it happens, and it was very funny; all through
school, kids learning sketches off by heart, the parrot sketch;
and it was very funny But it, it...it certainly seemed, they
didn't seem to have moved on at all, they seemed to be, I think
as you've implied, right, using past glories, sort of trying
to push...
L 12: No I think they have moved on in other ways, because...I mean
like Brazil...
L5: ...yes...the r e's the Python team on...as...yes
L 12: Brazil ...sep arately...has done (L12 and L5 both speaking here),
But when they come together they tend to wallow in what was the
time...
L5: ...what seems to be...past, Yes...
L 12: ...and that's understandable, you know...
L 14: But the Goons never moved on, did they,and yet people still fin
them funny...
L5: That's just institutionalised humour, that's all	 to a big
extent I think Monty Python is to a certain extent these days;
that doesn't detract from how effective it has been; but I
think it's institutionalised a lot...and...it's reasonable,
there's still funny stuff in that...
L 12; Did you wat...did you used to listen to the Goons? when you
were younger?
L14: No I didn't, no. I came to that later on...so for I mean that
had already become received as the comedy canon, if you like,
by the time I got it...
L12: ..it's a question of what becomes a pattern, I think...
L 14:	 but I still found it funny, even though I r d heard other
things before that that in fact followed on from the Goons as
the following sort of grew larger...but you see all humour is
going to be inskitutionalised, isn't it...
L5: Some more than others
L 12: ...yes...very quickly institionalised actually...
L5: ...that's why, yes, that's why it's, that's where The Young 
Ones and that sort of humour seems to be ...I think another
series of that ilk would be boring
L12: ...and even that was starting to bore me, I felt it was (?)...
L5: ...totally and utterly boring...
L12: ...because you could see the jokes coming...
L5: ...you could see the joke, yes, and it was very...Filthy Rich 
and Catflap was very, was very specific in itb humour, you
know, it was trying to...(?) parodying you know the TV
personality, you know, really the whole thing was about that,
it was a very small area og humour...
L14: I was reminded of that song with Flanders and Swan, with the
rude words in it, you know "peepo, bellybum draws"...and
they'd sing...
L12: ...from this?
L14: No no this was years ago, this was one of Rich...
L12: ...oh from Filthy Rich and Catnap...
104: Oh no, no,Flanders and Swan were...
L 12: No I mean what were you, what reminded you of it?
L14: Oh, sorry,,yes, well the, the idea of the shockingness of
certain subjectmatter...this has always been around, that if
they depend on the shockingness of the certain subject matter,
sure, once it's been expressed, once someone's dared to sa y its
that's taken away all the value; if that's all they're dependix
on...so then I think you've got to look at other things; for
example I found the very first section of that quite amusing,
because itplayed on cliches, and expanded them, and took them
literally; and I thought that was quite amusing...
L5: What do you mean?
L14: Well the, what was it, Crimson Life Assurance thing, the...what
was it, the Sea of Financial, Financial Seas or something...and
they literally, virtually showed you that, didn't they? They
took cliche after cliche and expanded it...
L5: Oh I see yes, ohs Yes...that's interesting, because I was going
to make, I was hoping to make a point about that some of the
sketches were clever, but not funny; I thought that bit...like
the Emerald City, do you know that bit, like Emerald City,
Wizard of Oz, and they come up to the City of London, or The
City, financial City, yes...yes, I thought, very clever, you
know, there was the shi p s and there was the...changed a bit,
didn't they, into sort of...the piratewptype film, and then at
the end they have that sort of musical bit, the song at the end,
all of them singing that sort of...and I thought, I thought,
this is clever, and I'm quite enjoying myself, trying to spot
the cliche and p and say where it came from, and how witty they
were being but ...I wasn't really laughing...
Q: Yes; another, another way of putting that question, is where
does the pleasure of comedy, humour, shade into other kinds of
pleasures?
L12: Mm...yes...
Q: Yes, what...can you distinguish between them? That's the probloi
L12: Yes...I mean I didn't find that at all funny, that first
section; I mean I was really debating whether to ring, you know,
'this is not funny at all' or the next bit...(L14 agreeing).,.
an& I was completely lost as to what we were supposed to be
thinking or...I couldn't recognize it, really, as kind of Monty
Python...what I enjoyed was then the reference beat to it
further on, when they sort of talk of it about being a Bmovie,
which I thought was rather cleverly done...
L5: It was like...
Q: Which is a bit like the original Monty Python television
programmes where you had bits of the News coming in, or...
L12: Yes...there was always...yes, that's right, or where you have
the gas men lined up, and they were still there three sketches
later, which I thought was wonderfully original at the time...
Q: I mean yes...getting back, back to something else which I think
is very interesting, you said (L14) about if dirty words have
been used: you seemed to imply that once it's been done, once
or twice, then it doesn't work any more...
L14: If it's been, if that is what is supposed to be funny, the
sheer shock value, of saying something that's not normally
said on television, I think, you know, it's bound to diminish
each time it's used...if that is the pure reason.
Q: Don't you think it's also...has it got something to do with the
people watching, or...I mean my experience sometimes hqs been
that Imean, whenever anybody salt* some socalled dirty word,
it raises a laugh...
L14: Yes ('?)
Q: How many times does it happen?
L12: But doesn't it, won't it depend on the context, though?
Q: Of course, it will, yes...
L12: Yes, like, I mean I didn't see the Ben Elton sketch, but I can
imagine, having seen Ben Elton, what that was like...and / mean
I enjoy, Imean I thought that the sex talk with the kids was
hilarious, because it was just what doesn't happen in sbhools,
you know, talking about the finer detail, all that sort of
thing, was amazingly funny, hilarious...and also the way the ki&
responded to it, which, it could have been any subject at all,
it's (?) next week, and it was just perfectly obs, beautifully
observed classroom practice.
Q: Well that's what I'm asking, is, which is...which is the strong,
element in that, I mean there are several things floating arount
one is there's a sort of satire, or, you know, on the sorts of
t hing s that happen in classrooms, the fact that that sort of
thing isn't dealt with at all...the other thing that's
happening is that there is explicit language being used; and at
the end of it all you know, as you say, you can find it very
funny; is that language part of what you find funny?
L5: I think in that sketch it's...sorry...
Q: Sorry I mean I...
L12: After you...( confusion as to who should speak) Well I don't
know, I'm not sure where one thing ends and one thing begins,
with humour; it's quite...it's also the way John Cleesep
parodies the schoolteacher which is brilliant...and one's
enjoyment at their ability to act so well, and just slip into
those roles; there are all sorts of pleasures which overspill
and intertwine...and in a cert...yes, the plearure in, I say,
the absurd classroom, but the fact that they're talking about
something that people don't even, find it difficult to even
talk about, in mixed social company, kind of doubly rams that
home, doesn't it? (general laughter)
Q: ...if you'll pardon the expression:
L14: ...always use the expression...(hilarity)...
L5: Yes, hang on...I was going to say much the same thing; I think
in the end that became funnier, I think almost when she came
on the bed it became maybe too explicit, not the sex I meant
too explicit, but the...
L12: ...you mean the joke had gone far enough...yes...
L5: Yes, the joke was just oh...it was a bit much; the funny thing
was, I think the subtlety of, as you said, the...the shy
grammar school boys...grammar school boys, I don't know; you
know shy, tentative, ..,sort of (naff) rigidly trying to...make
sure that they were going to come out of school...(L12 laughing)
...that was the funny bit, and his, as you say, his inability to
communicate towards them...
L12: But I mean he might just have been doing a Latin lesson,
mightn't he, realky...
L5: Yes, yes..that's what I mean...yes...
L12: ...that'was the double point of it, wasn't it, really, that he
wasn't doing it, he was actually talking about things that
people find difficult to talk about...
L5: ...that's right, so by the time the woman came on, (?)00%.000,
L12: ...the point of the joke really was...yes...but there's always
that sense I think with 'sketches', that you feel, however much
you've enjoyed them there's often that 'how are they going to
get out of this?' feeling, like with the Death one, you know,
all right,...follow me, you know where does it actually lead
to? And what was I think very good about the series on televisic.
initially was that, when they coldn't, when they'd made their
point and they wanted to end the sketch, they'd go into a
cartoon, you know, or 16 tons, or someone saying 'This is a
very silly sketch' and now for something completely different
I mean, they actually linked them well...which was almost an
admission, well hang on, all right we've made the joke, on to
something else...
Q: To some extent, half...it's halfway to abandoning the punch
line altogether,- and substituting, substituting another type
of mechanism for a punchline...
1,12: Yes ...yes.
1,14: Toing tack to the schoolboy sketch, though, a lot of the
pleasure of that was confounded expectations of other things,
wasn t t it...even the initial scene, where they're all working
away...(L12 bursts into laughter)...and as soon as they know
the master's coming they fell into what one believes the Bash
Street Kids are like...(?) stuff round the classroom...
Q: Umm...another area,which we haven't really touched on; when can
we...I mean this is just a general question, but we can link it
to the film...when can we find things funny when we find, the
subjectmatter sort of dubious Or we don't like the subject
matter; I'm thinking about racist jokes, sexist jokes...
something where we wouldn't expect to be able to find something
funny...
1,12: Well that is harder, isn't it, you know...I found myself in
that position with the, you know, all the naked women chasing
the bloke over the cliff, and they were actually self
consciously saying, weren't they, the reason he...he died was
for actually doing a sexist joke, you see...
L5: they're putting their own sort of safetynet, then...that's
quite interesting...
1,12: Yes...yes
L5: ..that is quite interesting because you don't know whether
they're going to be aware that you're aware that it's a safety
nets..
1,12: Yes...but they are, because they're e]Lever, you see.,
L5: Well you don't know, kou see, I mean...is it, yes, is it just
cleverclever, two fingers up to you, mate, we're going to put
these women in anyway...
1,12: ..well yes, ultimately...
L5: ...or not...I didn't find that particularly funny, but I don't,
I didn't, I didn't object to it...on sexist grounds; I just
didn't find it very funny...
1,14: I never thought that Monty Python was particularly noted for
it's feminist tendency; even that first thing, you know the
Crimson Assurande one, where there's a woman, she's sent to
put the kettle on; I noticed that...
1,12: Oh I don't think it's known for its feminism, but from the
period it comes from, it's a period when men 	 feminism was,
was around, wasn't it, and growing, it's an intellectual
humour, part of it's an intellectual humour, and therefore,
they can't not, as Cambridge graduates, be aware of what's
happening in society, in that sense, Y ou see what I mean
L14: yes, Yes...
L5: ...that's what I mean about the...
L12: ..and a lot of, I mean, women I think find then as amusin g as
men...do they? don't they?...in your findings?
Q: I don't know yet, I haven't looked at the data yet t but I,
that's the impression I get...but on the other hand...
1,12: They dress up as women a lot...
1,14: Yes they do don't th4y...
1,12:	 and I don't find that objectionable, actually, at all,
because mean OK they parody sort of Northern working-class
women, big bosoms and so on, Imean there's that, but it's not
over the top in something, the way that say Les Dawson is, or
even Benny Hill; but they also parody you know working-class
Northern men, don't they...
L5: Why is...I mean what's the difference between the way they do
it and the way Benny Hill does, what (?) Monty Python?
1,12: Well because they actually put it in, put it in a wider
context, I think, because mr they're taking the mickey out of
you know, like in the sketch with the children, you know the
Catholic couple, but I mean they're also taking the mickey out
of the working-class man, aren't they...
L5: Exactly, it's not as if...
1,12: ...it's a kind of classist thing, actually...
L5: Yes, isn't that a sort...isn't that like, isn't that Uambridge
boys being really clever, you know, it's, it's funny, I'm not
saying...
1,12: Well yes, but in talking about sexism and that I think what I'm
saying is, it's a classist thing I think, really...
L5: That's, yea, I think...
L12: ...that the whole point of it was actually
L5: I mean I could object quite easily to that sketch, with the
babies being born, and, you know, too thick for contraception
and all that, I mean...I could object, basically because I'm
a Yorkshire person...
Qs ...Third World, yes...
L5: ...I could be so upset...I mean it does, it sort of annoys me,
but that, it comes back to the paint I was, where, are they
aware of themselves being a bit stupid...
L12: ...well it's back to that point you made, yes...
L5: ...you know, and you know, and they're appealing to certain
things, I mean is the Irish joke harmless or not, is the
Yorkshire working-class flatcap, does this person exist?...I
mean it obviously gets a lot of laueass,..
1,12: ...but you see it's not just they do that, they actually, they,
I mean, they always seem to, the main thrust of their humour
always seemed to be anti-establishment, so it was always
picking on the army and pub/ic-school headmasters and figutes
of the Establishment; so I mean there(s always that sort of
check and balance, isn't there, in a sense...
L5: Yes, Yes...
L12: I mean they kind of, they're like 'PrivateEye; kind of have a
go at everything, really...
Q : Yes, Imean they...
L5: But they do it from a very very pampered positiont
L121 Well they do but I think that, they are also aware of that
anyway, they're very, they seem to be very aware of the mould
they were pushed into, in terms of public school and Cambridge,
and what sort of people society expects to come out of that,
and they've actually turned it on its head, and that's really
why I sup pose a lot of us find it funny, and at the time It
came out...
L5: ...in fact John Cleese is so antiestablishment, he's SDP now
L12: Well you know, he's, what, fortyeight years old, I mean, you
know, he's middleaged, and everybody...it's the classic...
L5:	 yes, I realize that, I realize that, but it's...
Q: They've certainly said that at that time their targets were, as
you say, military establishment, chartered surveyors...
L12: ...yes...accountants...
L5: There's always though a sex...there's a lot of, li1,e, sexual
things as well, sexial fetishism about all these	 they
attack, they've alwa y s been, which I,...vague perceptions of
the world associated with publicschool sensibilities, really
strange sort of ideas, not strange, but...
L12: ...yes, fetishistic...
L5: ...like about the army, you see it's funny, but it's almost
camp...like when he was,wahatsis name, when they were looking
for the fish, very bizarre...
L14: Yes, that was, wasn't it...
L12: ..there are, but there are, there are sort of serial elements,
aren't there...
L5: yes.. .that 00...surreal...
Q: That's, that's an exception...
L5: ..it was a bit more than just sort of Yes I thought that was
quite exceptional	 exceptional, for them...
Q: ,..in this film, anyway, 'mean there are...
L12: Yes...yes...
L5: They were just...it was pushing things...it was...funny, very
funny...
Q: Yes, somebody in one of the other groups said that it stood
out for them as being, you know much more absurd than anything
else...
L5: ...it was much more arty, if you like
L12: ...but it was...yes it was, but that's also the sort of thing
you'd expect more in the actual original series; and the
cartoons were quite surrealistic, weren't they...
L5:	 ...one wouldn't expect...yes, the cartoons always were, but I'u
not sure that I I d have expected anything like that sketch in
the series, the one we just referred to, I don't think
L12: Well I think there was much more kind of...I don't know,
variety...
Q: Well shall we say the sort of, yes the aimless, relatively
aimless absurdity of it, perhaps the imagery...
L5: The imagery was much different in that
Q:	 than it 'as tan years on...
L5: There was, yes, aimlessness...you had sketches which were...
(?)...and things like that...
Q: Anyway, Imean...let's get back for a moment to the possible
sexism; I mean this business about the fact that it's, I mean
you were asking the question about why it's different, their
playing, their being in drag from, say Benny Hill...or other
eomedians...Imean,
L12: What Is the difference?
Q: I mean what does it do to whether it's sexist of not?...you
know, those representations of women, sort of
L5: Maybe you feel that because they're Cambridge boys , You have
confidence in their ultimate, I don't know...
L12 : Well I think it's because they, they're not, I mean I wouldn't
actually call them sexist, they actually poke fun at a hell of
a lot of things in socety, so you can't just isolate that;
whereas with Benny Hill he takes the, he takes the 'general
line', doesn't he, you know, which is, let's poke fun at women,
you know, or let's have a cheap thrill, at womens' expense,
*ou know,..
Q: Yes...what,what...yes meant that the, a sexist representation,
for what that's worth, are those representations of women, if
such they are, say the cleaninglady being vomited ontor
whatever; is that in any way...I was, I've suggested that a
couple of times and other people have said well, they don't
react to that, because it's a bloke in drag...
L5: ..that specific thing, the cleaningwoman...
L12: Well I thought that was, yes, I thought that was a bit, I mean
my initial reaction was a bit sort of 'yeurch', you know, that
she was getting, getting it, and then I thought well hang on
a minute, that's a man dressed up as a woman, isn't it, I mean,
you get into that thing; and also John Cleese was getting
splattered, wasn't. he, as the waiter, so...you know...
L5: ...yes, other people got splattered...
L12: But the thing is, I mean and it is I suppose really your point,
you just don't know whether the y're, they're aware of or not,
you know, are they saying well this Is the position of women
in society, you know there are a lot of workingclass women
who are like this who are shat upon, and therefore...or, I mean
are they, or are they actually joining the bandwagon, I mean
that's what's a bit difficult...it is a question of how much
you trust them in terms of the other social comment that comes
from the other sketches...
L5: ...that's what Iwas saying...
L12: ...and I think, speaking as somebody who's a feminist, I
suppose I could say I presume you do trust them; if I didn't,
I wouldn't find them very funny, in the way that I don't find
Benny Hill funny...
L5: ...that's what Iwas saying, you've got to...
L12: ...well yes, the balance goes over, you know, it goes over the
L14: Well I suspect, and I hope nobody
because I'm not quite sure 
	 asks me to back this up
 e why I think it, but I suspect there'
a strongly misogynist thread that runs through all that; and I
find I have to step back from it to laugh...I do find them
funny, .,but I (?)...
1,12e But don't you think there is...don't you think there is in a
lot of humour anywayi because humour is male and mainstream?
L 14: Oh	 was just going to say, yes I was just going to say
that AIL of this is really from a masculine point of view...
L12; Yes, yes
L14: ...and I'm very much aware..,perhaps becauseI've, since then
I've seen people like Victoria Wood, French and Saunders...
L12: ...well right...yes,..
L 14: ..and having seen that control, once you've seen that you then
start to...
L12: ...Yes, suddenly now there's a feminist backlash to it, isn't
there..,
L 14: Yes, yes, one we were watching here, we're seeing a man's
point of view again...
L 12: And it would have been interesting to have seen the Ben Elton
sketch, and I would have found that very interesting...
L5: Yes but Ben Elton...
L12: ...to see a man talking about periods, I mean, you know...
L5: But you're going into...this is what I find so difficult, 'cos
we're talking about Monty Python, are they aware or not, and
Ben Elton obviously is All aware	 and yet*.
L12: ...yes but what we're F we're implying
L14: ..what did he actually say?:
L5: What did he actually say? well I'll tell you the sketch, as I
remember it...it was...
L12: Come on, stand up theta
L5: it Wass no no I'll tell you about it (?)...it was...he was
talking about how men, it's all right for men sitting around,
rugby players sitting around farting and being like really,
you know almost competi...macho competitive about farting, all
right...and then he likened this to, he said, what about, what
about if women decided to have their little competition, and
started coming out saying t cor, I've got a really heavy one
now', and he was going on like this, and we were going, I was
going God: whatts happening?...and yet everybody was laughing
when he was going on about men...
L12: ..and didn't people...who were you with, then, when you
watched it?
L5: Some friends that I live with, but there's a large studio
audience, anyway, on Saturday Live 'COS it's live...and so
there's (imitates laughter), and I'm like this...oh no, I
wasn't, that night I wasn't with my friends, what was so
funny, what was so funny actually, I was at home with my dad,
and I said, hey, here's a good programme we watch...(laughter)..
L12: What was your dad's reaction?
L5: He went...you know he ju s t;,mY dad...that's another story but
basically he didn't, he didn't, he didn't think it was very
funny...
Q: But that would influence your response as well...
L5: Yes, obviously.. .I realize now, because I was there and I felt
almost, I felt very selfconscious about the fact that I'd put
it on deliberately and told him to watch this programme,
L12: But you see what we're saying...
L5: ..,but thestudio audience did...did laugh, sort of...well they
sort of laughed...yes...
sort of with you there is that because in the last three or
four years you've actually got sort of female comedians,
whatever you want to call them, actually...coming up with
standup,- ybu know standup routines, and sketches which are
very much from the female point of view, Victoria, French and
Saunders etcetera etcetera, Fascinating Aida, which is really
sort of...looking, hang on a minute, chaps, this is what women
think, and there's a lot of humour too in what we see in you;
you know, would it have been more appropriate for, you know,
Victoria Wood to have talked about her last period, and..(,?)...
L5: Yes...well that's what I'm saying, that's what I was trying to
say, that Ben Elton, Ben Elton, doing that,- it was, I dbn't
know, I suppose, he was...
L 12: ...but it seemed funny a man doing it...that's what I'm saying;
L5: ._.,it seems stwange for a man...I don't know whether it seems
strange to me because he was actually talking about periods or
because it was a men doing it...again, I'd like to tlimk it
was because it was a man trying to...as I saw it, toady up to
some...something ideologically sound...
L12: ..but it's a combination of things, it's a man talking about a
women's domain, and it's a subject that's not talked about in
public, and it's a subject that, they won't even, you know
they're no going to even allow advertising, you're not even
allowed to mention sanitary towels; at least there is a Tampax
advert on Channel 4...
L5: ...I was going to say, the film tonight, was quite funny,...
from . the women...
L 12:
	 it'S cicumvented, they're not actually allowed to talk
about sanit ...it doesn't mention the word 'tampon' or period...
L5s ...yes, that's right
L 12: ...they say 'is it your time of the month?' and this kind of
thing, it's all euphemisms...they've had strong reactions of
whether they should have that or not, people saying, 'I don't
want this when I'm eating my dinner', hear about women's
periods, but I mean what about toilet roll? you know...really
when you think about it, you know,...yes, she did come out with
that line 'I'm having a heavy period',
L5: ..and that was quite funny...but it came from her...I mean
doing, but the fact that it was Ben Elton in his, that lame
suit...
L12: Maybe that's like the next...sort of area of humour, because
now it's OK to talk about bodily humour...
L5: ...yes but as soon as...
L12: ...and sex, it's now OK to go on to sort of womens things...
L5: As soon as it becomes the next area, it won't be funny, it'll
L12: ...-Yes but the question is, where it'll end, you know...
Q: I think, there tends to be an assumption here that, you know,
once it's been done, it's not funny any more; whereas, to some
extent it's also...sort of unconscious, you know, it's
something in us, which, perhaps there are anxieties about
particular areas...of the body and so on...
L14: Oh...Ithink that's true...
Qt ...and so, maybe we need to, there's a sort of safetyvalve
which, you know,.
L12: Yes, I don't know, reall y , I'm still thinking about that area
because, you know, in terms of, I don't know, sort of farttype
jokes, or that sort of thing, I mean, they've been around for
centuries, haven't they, and people still laugh at them...
L14: ..the whoopee cushion was the ultimate fartjoke, wasn't it...
L 12:
	 whoopee cushion is the ultimate thing for kids, isn't
it, and for adults alike, you know people still find it funny;
whether it's an area that people still feel embarassed about
and therefore they need that release periodically...
L53 ..that's your second ones (general hilarity)
L12: ...Freudian slips, aren't there...But...you see what I mean?
I mean I think the shock, there's a shock element of
menstruation being, periods being mentioned for the first time
by Ben Elton and...on a live programme, but that can, that,
there's a lot of mileage in that, isn't there, you know, really.
L 14: Oh there is..this is sothething not to do with Monty Python
directly at all but, thinking about Personal Servicen . which I
had to see twtce...
L 12: ...that's right, it's Terry, Terry Gilliam, Terry Jones...
Monty Python...tt's on the track, isn't it,..
L14: ...but you, if you've seen it, if you remember there's a scene
in the cafe, with the three women, or rather two women and one
transvestite, talking about men and the size of their equipment
and all that kind of thing; and one of the reviewers said you
know this was obviously a rolereversal, this was women tilting
at male power...it was a man who wrote it and I thought: you've
obviously never listened to women in the staffroom I don't
know about what your experiences are...but I am sure 	 women
do takk about that rind og thing...
L12: No but I think (?) everything that women...because the male
viewpoint is the dominant viewpoint, they never think there
could be an alternative, and that women might laugh or joke
about that kind of thing...(all talk simultaneously here)
..welI I mean in the way that men sit around and make sexist
comments about women and the size of their knockers or whatever
women can equally do the same thing,I mean and obviously that
completely Lindercuts men, because they haven't even thought
about it, some men.
L5: I mean you're saying that you all make sexist comments about
men...
L12: No I'm not saying we all make sexist comments...(L12 and L5
arguing simultaneously)
L5: No no no no, I'm asking you, not you all, I said that you will,
you will...I never said you all...
L12: You can have a private joke, can't you, with a girlfriend, and
women do talk very easily, more easily than men do...
what we, we, as men, generally speaking...
L12 : ...generally, generally speaking, except...
L5: ...listen, listen, (L12 laughs)...we as men, generally, say,
pass sexist comments, and then you said but we can do the sane
about men, if we want...
L12: ...if we want...
L5: ...so you can make sexist comments as well about men
L 12: Of course.
L5: Yes; so you're, so basically both make sexist comments about
each other, and it's all right, it's all even, because we do
it to each other...
because the male...
L14: ..it's mit public...
L12: ..because it's no public, and it's not accepted, and because
the culture is a male culture...
L5: ...you mean the fact that we can make sexist jokes louder than
you can...and get away with it...
L12: It's like black people might make comments about white people...
. I think, yes...I think...
L14: I think really it's (?) Isn't it...
L12: We do it out of defence, I suppose, don't we, (?)...
L5: I should think the majority of men who do that sort of thing
do it out of a different sort of defence, as well...
L12: Of course they do, of course they do...
L14: The thing is that male sexist humour, if you like, ktbs been the
predominant form...
L12: ...exactly...(L5 agrees)
that film was something that I hear, well no I don't hear it
every day, but I do, I mean we get together in the staffroom
and we discuss menand we say my God it's about time he wore
underpants, or something like that, and then it goes on from
there...and it amazed methat he hadn't even thought that this
kind of (?) went on...
L12: Was he shocked then?
L14: I think he thought it was a rather intersting rolereversal,
it was in'New St;Ssman s You see, so he thought it was a very
interesting reversal from a social point of view...
L12: But it's not...the kind of thing that actually happens...
L5: I don't think, Imean, personally it doesn't surprise me one
bit, that you were discussing men in the same way that men
would discuss...I'm not trying to say, hey (?) or anything,
it just doesn't surprise inc...
L12: ..but that may be to do with your age and this critic was in a
period where he ...hadn't even questioned that women had a mind
to think like that, even...
Q: Let's, let's get back to pleaning of Life
L12: Let's get back on the...(general laughter)
Q : ...raising the question of...you just raised the question of
age and everything, things like that...what kinds of people,
do you think, appreciated Monty Python when it first came out?
and Particularly...this film...
L12; I think that's an interesting one, because there are repeats on
now, aren't there, on Saturday nights, and I was at home with
my family last Saturday, and I know that my mother doesn't find
it very funny, though she's got a very good sense of humour,
we can giggle like two schoolgirls together, and she's seventy,
at certain things; but she doesn't understand, she doesn't
really understand the poking fun at establishment type jokes;
she just thinks of that as being silly, John Cleese being
silly, his silly walks, that sort of thing, you see; so she
can't actually join in in the wily we might sit together and
watch something that was a bit more kind of mainstream...
Q: So something being 'silly' isn't...
L5: Well monty Python is really mainstream now...
L12: Well it's a bit...well yes it is, but you've still got to be
probably below a certain age to appreciate that, below whatever
age they are, midforties, probably, because there's a real
kind of generation gap there, I think. And when I watched it...
(?)...I was like, whatever, sixteen or seventeen or something,
and I thought it was wonder...I just couldn't believe, I
accidentally put it on Sunday night; and I was just enthralled,
I thought what the hell is this programme?you know...
Q: ..that was very exciting, yes...
102:...it was like being hit in the face with something, it was very
exciting, and it sort of coincided with my growing up, so I
suppose in that sense I've got a kind of special place for it
in my heart, in a way I probably will defend it, because it
coincides with pleasant associations in my life...and people
you mixed with, you know, both sexes enjoyed it, and...there
was a lot of pleasure in that...and Ifound a lot of pleasure
im actually watching them, and I find Michael Palin quite
attractive, so I quite enjoy watching him...you know, there's
a kind of pleasure oh here they are, here's the lads you know
what I mean? there's a sort of pally feeling I get when I
watch them...
Q: All those...all those reasons sort of contribute to sort of
being inclined to accept them...
L12: oh, yes...yes...
Q: ...maybe they're not, sott of...I mean in a sense there must be
Patriarchal, sexist things in the background somewhere, but...
L12: Yes...yes, it kind of warms me, yes...whereas if I was of a
different, you know, if	 was a thirteen, fourteen yearold,
now, I'd think, oh, passe, you know, I'd be really into The
Young Ones. like that I used to teach at school were, but it's
a question of what's on when you're kind of getting to that,
when you suddenly kind of, stop being a child and you suddenly
see the world through adult eyes, you know, which happens
somewhere in your teenage period...it's about being very
impressionable, I think...but I remember, what used to get me,
that, when I was sort of at college and that, that it used to
be such a cult thing, but the cult obvilously widened, like all
cults do, until it became, like, a very established thing with
young people...ahh, got to sit and watch Monty Python...we used
to sit and watch it in the student Union building, and like five
hundred people watching it, and it was very interesting to see
what bits people laughed at...and some of the very obvious
jokes, like sort of, I doh't know, anal humour type things,
theme were people that would be rolling, liteally sort of
rolling on the floor; but some of them didn't understand the
kind of more subtle intellectual type things...and that was like
that became the cult of the cult, so like the JeanPaul Sartre
do you remember the JeanPaul Sartre sketch, the laundry, and
then there's /it's cardboard cutout, and (?) Libre and all that,
which Ithink is hilariously funny, but there were some people,
sort of it was a bit beyond them, because, I think people get
out of it what they can, which is probably true of everirthing,
really...but...there is a lot of subtlety there, but ik's quite
intellectual, a lot of it, and you've got to know about Jean
Paul Sartre and the joke about freedom, to be able to laugh at
that; if you don't know it, you're going to not find that very
funny..., you're going to wait for the next sketch, the next
cartoon...
L5: How mtch do you think, Imean, to know, understand that JeanPaul
Sartre sketch, I mean how much about Saltre do you need to know?
L12: Well you just need to know who he is, that he's French, and
he was a philosopher, and he was sixty years trying to find out
if he was free or nost, I mean...you've just got to know a bit
about him, haven't you...if, you know, if you don't know that,
yOU can't laugh at that joke, it means nothing...
L5: ...yes, something...those references, the references they make,
they constantly do that, even in their most ridiculous humour,
do you remember the...the Drunken Philosopher Song?...it
'boozy beggar...can drink you under the table"...and it goes ox
and on, and then the refrain "Socrates himself is permanently
pissed..."...and it, that's, that was very funny, but the actual
references were quite highbrow...philophically very highbrow**,
L12: ...well they are...yes...
Q: Do you think it's knowing something about those characters, or
just simply...being able to use them in a sketch...
L12: ...that's funny...
Q: ...actually having them as references...
L5: I think it's...you know they would say...you see they're always
in an advantageous position, because they would say "oh we're
debunking all this" you know, and "taki#g the piss out of
philosophy, we're taking the piss out of university", they
always, they've been there, they've done university, they've
studied these people, it's a very, very...you know it's satire
of quite a...reasonably high knowledgelevel, not necessarily
intellectual...it's not...
L12: ...because it's about two housewives, isn't it, in the
launderette, looking him up, you know,..but it's when they're
arguing about philosophy in the lauderette and there's Mrs 
CardboardCutout goes past, I mean...
L5: Yes...Yee, that's right...
Q: ...and there's another one in the supermarket...
L12: ...so, but it's just the same as...as the boys in school, isn't
it, that it's totally the unexpected, isn't it, of, instead of
having Benny Hill or whoever would have two house2ives talking
a load of nonsense, you know, very everyday kind of stuff, what
they're doing is having a highly intellectual conversation...
Q:  ..which in fact works, could be said to work against the sort
of classist notions of ignbrance and _so on...( g eneral agreement)
...app arently really sort of,...(TrirlresStPc)
L5: That's right, the fact thatit's, that sort of everyday knowledge.
sort of...no, that it's becoming (common?), such as Sartre and
philosophy...It was a pilgrimage, wasn't it, if I remember the
sketch, didn't they actually go on a pilgrimage to Paris?...
L12: Well they do, because they ring him up; they're arguing over
something, so they decide, and it'S 'Paris 346', and they ring
him up, and they speak in pidginFrench, to his cleaner, and the
can't get him, so they're going to go over to, to sort out the
question, you see...(?) idea really...I mean it's totally
bizarre, but,...there's all sorts of elements there, I think
it's very rich, you see, I think there's, you can shred the
layers away, there a hell of a lot there that you can actually
laugh at...you can laugh at the Mrs CardboardCutout idea, you
know...and I think, as I said, their references back and
forward are very clever, and lead you to think...they play
with time, they play with time...
Q: Which is...which is one of the important things missing in
Meaning of Life, in a sense...
L12: Yes Imean I, the feeling I have with this film is that they had
all these wonderful ideas for sketches like a big fat man
exploding, whatever	 but they didn't know how to link them, so
they kind of went into this Seven Sta	 Seven Ages of man,
Shakespeare thing, and I felt that was a kind of imposed
structure, I wasn't terribly happy about...I was aware of the
structure because of filling in that, where I knew I'd got to
Section five and it was, like, the Autumn, so I was looking,
thinking right UK, now we're into middleaged people...but
sometimes the sketch kind of went way off, and didn't actually
stay on the...tha 'age' theme...and I thought it was kind of
imposed a bit, that structure, and I think, I'm not sure it
worked really...
QS Well in fact the sketches were practically written before; and
they got together and couldn't think of how to put them togethe
at all, until suddenly they had thim brilliant idea, something
about being...comment...and within half an hour they'd cobbled
it together and said, yes, you know, this'll do it
L12: But why did they feel they had to do that linking, because the
programmes never had that...did they, they deliberately...
L5: I mean...it's so blatant...if they're expecting people to
understand their philosophical references, I'm sure they
expected people to realize that it is cobbled together, and it'
just a joke, I mean it's so obviously done, that they must know
that the person who understinds the references to xyz
philosophers can say,...God...they're just taking the piss...
L12: Yes but I just felt it was kind of, it didn't work naturally...
Q: But on the other hand they, I guess they would have been going
you're looking, you're looking for a wider audience, aren't
they?...as well...
L12: Are you also looking for a narrative structure..,
L5: They might, mean they might have been, I su pp ose they might
have, it might have been arnmarketing ploy.. .1 never thought
of that...
Q: I think initially that structure was...
L5: .00 a marketing ploy to get everybody in, and...I mean, it vas,
part of the running joke was the fact that these sketches were
just so ridiculously, the connections were so tenuous between
the title and what the sketch was about, I mean that was part
of the joke...so I mean...
Q: Yes, at one point	 the point at which it falls apart is the
Live Organ T ra n splant...(lau ghter)...and 'Part 6b, The Meaning
of Life':
L5: Yes, it's just, you know, just stupid...
Q: Umm...I'll just see, I'm looking through my list o f...Yes, /
mean one thing which we haven't raised, which I mean may not
get us anywhere, is in talking about comedy and humour...I mean
clite a lot of the time we were talking about jokes; does it
make sense to talk about films like Meaning of Life as if
they're jokes...what's, how do you compare, what do you see as
the relation between...
L12: What do you mean 'jokes'? You mean like, when people sit and
just tell jokes?
Q: (yes...)
L12: Well I, yes...I mean actually I wrote something about this on
your form...which you'll see, in a few minutes: I mean I don't
think jokes, I mean, when we talk about humour I don't think of
jokes, I don't think jokes are particularly funny, I think...
yes OK the first one, I might laugh, and then, I mean, if I try
and remember them, I tend to get the punchline wrong or
something, ruined it...I personally think that ...(?), but I
might as well say it, I suppose...you know, it's the situations
that arise from real life that are funnier; it's the ironies
and the expectations that aren't met, are undercut, which I
think are funnier...the sketches aren't really, they're not
based around a joke, are they? It's not standup comic joke
thing; it's a kind of observatio0 of life: look, this is how it
is, and if you just slip that down a bit, you know, it's
something else again...isn't it absurd, isn't life absurd?
And I think it's hilariously funny, but...I'm not a jokey sort
of person...(short gap here) SOO and suddenly the carpet's pulled
from underneath them, there's this big hole in the floor, kind
of thing, it's that idea, metaphorically speaking, that, that
the outcome isn't what they *bought, while we, we often have
prior knowledge, we have knowledge that they don't have, and
we can laugh at their expense. There's that element, isn't
there. But there's also, like, there's visual humout, though,
isn't there, like when in the Tiger sketch, when.Idle,. looked
down, there was this tiger's head which was kind of moving,
which was just visually funny
Q: ...which usually gets a laugh...
funny, there's all sorts of different things that are funny:
Q: What does a joke entail?
L12: Do,you want to put it on pause?
Q: And you're not going until you've , told me (laughter)
L12: Well actually that was one of their sketc4es, wasn't it, about
the funniest joke in the world, everyone laughed so much, they
died...and they got rid of the Germans...
ev'uoylit'gngoinotne'ruoyL5: That was a joke, wasn't it, '	 told
me...
Q: Well you see, I don't think it is...that's what I mean; I think
that that sort of comment you'll find in films like this,
surely...is there...
L5: ...it's a joke, though...
L 12: Why don't you tell us what you mean by 'joke'?
L5: ..Imean you're taking...the unexpected, taking a situation,
and giving it an apparent context.  4. ( ? )  .I'd have said it was
a joke...	 4- 9{.4e414441 .J014- CA11442- Lt-
Q: It depends where you situate the dentition, the part of, you
know the part of the definition...
L12: Is there a definition of a joke, what does the dictionary say
on 'joke'?
Q: I don't know what the dictionary says, but .. I know what Freud
says
L12,L14: What does Freud say?
Q: You don't really want to know, do you?
L 14: Yes
Q: Umm...there's a particular configuration of...of positions,
you've got the first person, there's a second person, which
would usually be a woman, right, to whom, this Is why men are
generally meant to be the ones who tell jokes, because there is
a sexual, in very broad terms, a sexual, sort of aggressivity
felt, either desire or aggression...felt towards this woman,
which is originally, which is the motherfigure, originally...
and one wants to express this, this aggressivity through,
through 'smut', through actually some sort of sexual suggestion
towards the woman; because that isn't allowed, socially, one
translates it, by a process similar to dream, into some other
structure, which conceals the motivation for that, and that is
through the jokework, and so one tells the joke to the third
person, in whom that gives pleasure, and one gets satisfaction
from giving pleasure to the third person, which one can't get
from expressing the smut...
L 12: ..that's more to do with kind of...
Q: . that's the structure...
L12: ..the function of humour, as well, isn't it...
Q: yes the psychological function of it..but then, Freud goes
through a lot of different mechanisms in the actual joke, how
they work, double meanings and so on...I've forgotten some of
those bctause they weren't really important...(? ) joking, sort
of I think, you know, through the opposite, sang- something
through the opposite, exaggeration was another one, using
exaggeration and so on...
L 12: But, but there is a kind of cathartic, a kind of psychological
cathartic release, isn't there, as you say not being able to
say directly what you'd like to say , and therefore it's kind
of disguised, isn't it, and...
Q: Yes, it's displaced...
L 12: ...displaced.. .(?)...but I mean...but, Freud, classic, you know
always from the male point of view...that's what (L141 and I
were saying, that in the last few years, women have now found
their voice publicly, in terms of being able to tell jokes;
because it was always a sort of male myth, wasn't it, that
women didn't have a sense of humour; they weren't allowed to
because they always had to be the butts of male jokes...
Q:  ..which raises the problem, I mean this is why Freud's theory
becomes problematic, when you start talking about women, womens'
jokes, Imean, all right, humour is something else, but then it,
L12: Freud didn't understand women, basically...
Q: ...women stand up and tell jokes, as well, illright, but then
you have to really rethink that completely, about when women
start telling jokes, now is that because they're taking, is
Freud's theory still...fundamentally and largely right ' and
women are taking the...that masculine position in expressing
some kind of sexual...
L14: ..yes
Q: ...aggressivity, iv that model still right, or does the model
have to be abandoned?
L12: Looking back..,looking back, it's definitely there, isn't it,
Imean Victoria Wood laughing at those...the plumber, she's
talking about the plumbers, the builders were in, she said,
didn't she, and she was laughing at...the bloke with his bun
hanging out, and all that, mean that was very much women
poking back at, fun at men...
L14: Oh I see, yes, I see, a complete reversal...
L12: ..you know...but it's, it's, the thing is that the woman is
in the actual active position rather than the passive recipient,
I mean it's reverded...
Q: I'm not sure, again, is that a joke, you know, one is actually,
that kind of thing is, if you're poking fun at somebody, I mean
in Freud's terms the distinction is between that, that
mechanism and the 'comic', which for him is, is the recognition
of some kind of superiority, a discrepancy in the, well he
talks about energy and so on, but I mean in a sense the energy
one expends on something compared with the energy that somebody
else has expended, has expended about something and one laughs
because of the difference, one has some sort of sense of
superiority, and in Freudian terms it would be the comic,
those things about superiority; but then if something comes
into it which is wordplay, a sort of pun, or an exaggeration
or using the opposite to get that point across, then you've
got the jokemechanism coming in..
L12: I'm not sure I'm clear on...not from your definitions, but I
don't know that I'm clear in my head, 'cos you know what to
think about it, I mean what is comic and what is joke, I mean
I don't think we've defined these words closely, do you...I
mean that's very comical, but I wouldn't call it,"jokey...
whereas I might call...I don't know, The Two  Ronnie, some of
their dketches...are -jokes...sort of puns and so on...and
visual jokes...but it's not necassarily i comic'...I don't know,
it's very...
Q: Yes...I mean there's an example of a visual joke, I mean
there's a guy who's written about the visual jokes in film,
and for...for him, a joke on film is something which, which.
plays around with the structure of the film; in Monty Python 
and the Holy_Grail when you've got the rabbit...this sort of
clockwork rabbit in the cave, which attacks the soldiers, I
think at one point there's a monster, isn't there in the cave,
which appears, but then in order to get rid of tae monster,
Terry Gilliam has to suffer a heart attack, while he's drawing,
and that, that would be a sort of joke, because it's using the
mechanism of the film, filmmaking and the animation, the fact
that the animator has to drop dead halfway through, that's a
j...that's called...
L12: But you see when you've got the narra...it's also to do with
expectation of the narrative, isn't it, that the Holy Grail,
you have, because we live in a culture, an idea, you have an
idea of whatthe Grail should be, and therefore they can just
set up that expectation and completely knock it down and that
automatibally becomes funny.,.that instead, I mean when they
have the fight and they start lopping limbs off each other and
then saying "it's only a scratch", they're taking the mickek
out of so many conventions, isn't it...
Q: ..and also in this film the...the Zulu war...
L 12: ...yes, exactly, Yes...and that's knocking at kind of macho
images, isn't it, and also the stiff upper lip bit, and I mean
there's just so many layers, there, when you actually analyse
what youlre laughing at...
Q: All right, have we exhausted everything?
L14: We probably haven't...
L 12: No I 11 1/ probably go home and think of something, and say 	 why
didn't I say that
Q: Well I'll collect up...
L 12: I think you do sort of, I personally, being of that sort of
generation, do warm to them, I know that's part of it...and I
think you get, you get to know the repertoire, so you're
looking for certain, when John Cleese comes on you're looking
for particular types of characters that he pla y s and he does so
well; and the same with...all of them, really...there's a
pleasure in seeing who's going to dress up asa woman this
time, or who's going to play the stigf upper lip...upperclass
twit...
L5:	 s precisely why, now, I don't find it so funny...
LI2: Well, it's, well...I didn't say funny; there's a pleasure, it's
pleasurable, like I'm meeting some old friends; but the humour
is deadened somewhat because it's also predictable, so you have
to weigh up a certain pleasure or warmth you get from that
against the loss of cutting edge...of humour...
L5: I think that when they actually split, I think it was quite,
quite perceptive IT them to split up when they did because they
could have gone on, and coined it	 know they went into
films but when they actually stopped on telly I think it was
qtite perceptive of them, because...I remember the later series
were beginning to, to fizzle out...
It was John Cleese who left...wellhe left the television series
anyway...and the fourth series only had silt programmes...
L5: That's right, without him...
Q: ...it was retitled...
L5: I was about third year at school, I think...
L12: You were so young, so young What did you make of it, it was
interesting when you said you first watched it when you were
whatever, nine ten eleven...
L5: ...brilliant, I just thought it was brilliant...
L12:	 but I mean you were bery young, that's...
L5: I just thought that it was...it was quite e xciting ; as I said,
it was naughty, to be watching...late...
L12: ..what because of the...explicit language...
L5: ...because of the...I thi nk...yes, and the, it was quite a
grownup humour, and you perceived it around as being quite...
Q: ...part of the pleasure would be quite simply the fact that one
realizes that it is... grownup ...this must be good
L12: ...it's forbidden fruit...yes...
L5: yes that's right...
L14: I remember that I was...
L5:	 ..and also...like...as I say, when these later series came on,
although they weren't as good as the earlier stuff, at thirteen
or fourteen, you're going home and you're watching it avidly
and talking about it all day, next day at school...and, you
know, you got sketches learned overnight, and you come back,
...(?)...
L12: I mean I think, it's easy to...
L5: ...the silliness of it...I think it does appear to, it does
appeal to really silly schoolboys...
L12: I think it's also weryjeasy to underestimate the importance of
that kind of humour in your life, you know...that it's, it's
you know it's equal tt kind of popgroup adulation, or football
team adulation, isn't it, because you do go to school and you
say "did you see soandso ...?". ..and it's li.e the most
important thing of the whole school day, yes...it's very...and
the same, when I was like at college I would, I suppose
subconsciously, kiitd of tune into people...(brief interruption)
...used to sort of subconsciously tune in to people who, who
liked it in the way you did, there was obviously that kind of,
you know which would be the same as liking the same pop group
or something, wouldn't it, that idea of yes we're on the same
Q: Well I mean John, John Cleese said that Imean in an interview
that he was wondering about the audience response, because they
used to go on tour, and he worked out, it was exactly, you know
people would cheer when they recognized the Dead Parrot sketch,
they wouldn't laugh very much all through it, and when it
finished they'd cheer wildly again, so...people weren't actual).:
laughing at the sketch at all, it was exactly that kind of...
L5: ... like a connoisseur Parrot Sketch:
L12: But you see, you know, Groucho Marx said, didn't he, if you get
one sket, one joke in four you're doi*g well...the idea that
they're so fast, but it's also that, you know tuning in to
things, you don't always get what there is on offer, do you,
you know, something doesn't aPpeal to you, but appeals to the
next person...and that's why I thought it was quite good,
rewatching them, not recently, but before, when they were on;
but then they've set such a pattern for the way humour's gone
through the seventies and eighties, that I think that's the
problem, they're...not necessarily acknowledged as being as
important as they are. ...I mean everyone kept saying, oh, Not
The Nine O'Clock News, must watch that, and I thought, yes,
it's very funny, but I still thought it was very derivative of
Monty Python, I thought hang on, I've seen this before, you
know...and I think the same even with The  Young  Ones. which I
enjoy enormously but it's just...like a Monty Python sketch
gone mad, isn't it really...
Q: In a sense it's derivative for us, for you, because that's our
generation, but people who are perhaps a bit older, who liked
Monty Python, would, would still say that well yes, but that's
a bit derivatives what about The Goon show or whatever...
L12: ...well the Goon Show and even the sort of Beyond The Fringe 
I was just going to say, it's the whole mould of alternative
humour, really...
L14: ...well you talked earlier...about when you were a schoolboy
L5: No...it was just...
L14: Cool: cool, man...
No, no no...
L14: What I was going to...
L5: sorry carry on...
L12: ...yes, we know what you mean...
LI4: But...I suppose for us it was That Was The Week Thattal, and
the satire...
LI2: yes, yes...
L14: I was a shade older than you were talking about then, but we
would stay up on a Saturday night...that was where it was at:
and watch it; funny enough watching the rerunr of tholse quite
recently; you sat there and you thought, Oh my Godt...and we
laughed at that...and that is quite one of the most disturbing
things I've ever...
L12: ...yes I suppose when you realize...yes...
L14: ...it's like losing your religion, isn't it...suddenly it
doesn't mean anything...
L12:  ..but, only because it's set a,dpattern which is now being
fbllowed, and themefore it hasn't got the freshness...
L14: YeS 6.. YeSp yes...
L12: I mean Spitting Image, you know, is kind of reasonably new and
different, and I suppose in five years' time that will also
seem a bit hackneyed...
L14:	 well even that's only reflecting the sort of grotesqueries
of Hogarth, if you want to go really back...
Q: I mean somebody at school yesterday was...I was just listening
about sort of, Jimmy Jewel, all these, going back in television
and mdsichall...and people, tapes they've been listening to..,
and it occured to me that quite a few of those had things in
which were...similar . to Monty Python: The sort of lines people
were coming out with, the ideas that were in there...the absurd,
an elephant in a box or something...
L12: ...there's quite a lot of...theretts quite a lot of absurdity in
in Hancock, even, isn't there	 but maybe, maybe what we're
saying,w* qtomtt even know it, is that there are certain element;
in humou* that are there, and will always be there, and that's
the human condition, you will always laugh when you're triggere<
off by one of these elements...and therefore, you knov, it
doesn't matter if you go back forty years or "back to Hoath or
whatever, there are certain...
L14: ...you're talking about the universals aren't you'?
L12: things that people perennially, universally will find funny...
L14: ...Yes, that's a (?) factor...
Q: yeees.  .
L12: I mean I, you know...
L14: We all love trou really
L12: ...you know, I mean the porter scene in Macbeth, you know,
coming out with the words he was coming out in that, which was
sort of shocking, in a serious play, amd so on, but the, you
know the ordinary people loved it...
L14: Iralking about shocks and things, remember the point we were
making about rude words earlier on, actually I didn't mean that
there wasn't some value in it but I think some people
deliberately use that, just to shock, they say look, I'm being
terribly avantgarde, I'm using...and yet coming up here on
the tube this evening, there were a couple of girls discussing
their boyfriends at the pub, and the language was quite avant
garde, and the whole carriage was getting the benefit of it...
L12: What do you mean avantgarde?
L14: Everything's effing and blinding, you know...
L12: But that's very boring, isn't it...
L 14: Oh very very boring...
L12: ...it's a lack of imagination really, isn't it...
L 14: Well it is; but you see it's a bit hypocritical really then to
hear it on television and say oh, shock horror: when you've sat
on the underground and you've heard that for the last...three
stations...
L12: But, but it's that, though, isn't it, it's the fact that in
real life you can hear swearing and you can, you can talk about
certain things with your friends, but that you don't expect
Establishment, especially BBC, to come out with, I mean I
suppose The Young Ones really was quite something.. .On the BBC
as Monty Python was in its time, just as the AIDS week ought
to go down in history back in February, for talking and showing
condoms, which is, you know...my mother said, God like you,
your father would have been shocked at this and I thought yes,
suppose people get increeibly shocked at this, this is real
milestone in television history, this kind of thing...but if
you mix in circles where you talk about that kind of thing and
you're not shocked, it's not quite so shocking to see it on
television, but little, little old ladies in Eastbourne might
well have been, you know...
Q: I think it's quite right that it can be uded in comedy,
deliberately as a device, sort of consciously, and then it...
I suppose it can show through, you can see what's going on...
L 12: ...yes...it comes across as false, though, doesn't it...
L 14: I think so, and I think that's...and sometimes you'll all, if
you hear a television or radio audience, you will always hear
that, there's one or two people who give out a little titter
when a certain word is uded...and you think, well why, why are
Irou laughing at that, you must come across things written on
walls in the open air, on the railway, everywhere...not
everyone (laughs)...
L12: But it's the context, isn't it, the context...
L 14: It is the c ontext, because somebody that...
1,12: ...like Mar garet Thatcher, Thatcher saying 'fuck', or something
you know, Imean, it's to do with context, isn't it, and
breaking that...
L/4: I wonder if she ever does
Q: Well if Edwina Currie can...
L 12: Did she?
L5: Well apparently she told someone to fuck off, didn't she...
L12: Did she? really? (laughs)
L5: ..behind the scenes after an interview...a, was it an awkward
question or something?
L 12: But you're back to the kind of appearance and reality thing
there, aren't you, the expectation, you expect a certain
formality, or mode of behaviour and control with certain
people, and then when you don't get that, that's where it's
undercut, you see...which is why they, they like to set up
their upperclass, you know, army types, you know, or whatever,
who then swear or (?) bottoms or whatever it is, and then you
get the cheap laugh out of it you see...
L5: Yes but that...yes, that's like undercutting whatever but I
mean they would say...I don't know, there's an element of
reflecting reality, what I was trying to say earlier about,
often their jokes revolve around sexual. fetishis...fetishists,
I can't speak tonight...and,...
L12: I dn't think anyone can say that words
L5: It's fetishes, not fetishists, it's fetishes, that, you knows
they were saying this is the Establishment...half the time the
Establishment is publicschool, qnd this is what's happening
L12: Yes...yes, look at the judges...
L5: ...so they're not undercutting, they're, they are giving a
wholer picture, a lar ger picture, or something...but I mean a
lot of their humour came from that, I think...
L 12: Yes, I agree, it's just that your ordinary person intthe street
isn't always aware of that, are they...
L5: No...exactly..therefore again...(?)
L 12: ..and therefore it's...educational, in that sense
L5: ...Yes, that links up with somehing I was saying earlier, as
well, about the, are they, they're aware of, or I think Jan
suggested there's two sorts of ap peal...when you were saying
earlier about using that structure of Meaning of Life, some
sort of structure to get people into the cinema, and I was
sa ying well maybe for a lot of people it *tie a joke, the actual,
you know, the joke was that this is a structured film, ha ha ha,
it's not at all, but it's presented as such,or...was saying
do they know what they're doing...
L12: Yes, it's a question of how far removed they've become from it;
L5: ...so, with, with this public school, I think there's a lot
of that, a lot of their humour is public school, or based
aro und...if you like, almost exposing
L 12: Yes, it's a question of intent, isn't it, are they exposing it,
or are they just poking fun at it, or what...
L5: Well I think, they're sort of exposing it a lot of the time,
they'd like, I think, as you said, they would perceive them-
sel v es as antiestablishment, and there's nothing more, so, as
establishment in Britain, as public school...
Q: Yes...there is a big distinction between what one wants to do
in terms of, you know one can want to make you know subversive
jokes and be satirical, but the function it attually fulfils...
L5: ...is, can be completely different, yes, 'cos do appeal to...
some of the things they do, almost as slapstick, it's very
funny to see a major wearing ladies' underwear...army jacket
above, and the ladies underwear...
Q: ...but also I mean in a...there are a lot of institutions whifl
can take it, so to speak, which are big enough to be able to
say, oh yes, you know, it actually can add to their, to their,
yes to their, their stature, that, you k#ow, well we can take
a joke...
L 14: What, the ultimate tribute being that you appear on Spitting
Image...
Q: Yes.
L I2: Well that's what people will say, I mean they say that because,
what else can they say, you know, David Steel was asked, wasn't
he, last night on Channel 4, 'what do you think?'...and I mean
you can't say 'I'm deeply offended', can you...
Q:	 yes, you're a bit stuck...
L I2: What can you sa y, You're stuck, you're cornered, aren't you
actually going back to that army sketch, I've just remembered
something, you know where the, Michael Palin's the sergeant
major and they all think of their excuses to get out of the
squarebashing...and when we got that, I thought here we go,
you know the army, and I thought we were going to go into
another version of the, the gayboy...
L14: Oh You thought thit too...(?)...
L12: Yes, (?) and I was very curious to see what they were going to c
do with that one, 'cos I thought they wouldn't dare do exactly
the same thing, would they; but it was very popular, so they...
tendency to want to do that...
L14: Do you know I'd forgotten that bit there...
L12: Had you?
L14: I didn't remember it at all, when I saw it this time...
Q: Well perhaps we've said enough...
L12: I don't think there's any more...well there might be, but...
morning and you think, oh that'sthree or four o'clock in the
what 'meant, yes...
	D095424_1_0001.tif
	D095424_1_0003.tif
	D095424_1_0005.tif
	D095424_1_0007.tif
	D095424_1_0009.tif
	D095424_1_0011.tif
	D095424_1_0013.tif
	D095424_1_0015.tif
	D095424_1_0017.tif
	D095424_1_0019.tif
	D095424_1_0021.tif
	D095424_1_0023.tif
	D095424_1_0025.tif
	D095424_1_0027.tif
	D095424_1_0029.tif
	D095424_1_0031.tif
	D095424_1_0033.tif
	D095424_1_0035.tif
	D095424_1_0037.tif
	D095424_1_0039.tif
	D095424_1_0041.tif
	D095424_1_0043.tif
	D095424_1_0045.tif
	D095424_1_0047.tif
	D095424_1_0049.tif
	D095424_1_0051.tif
	D095424_1_0053.tif
	D095424_1_0055.tif
	D095424_1_0057.tif
	D095424_1_0059.tif
	D095424_1_0061.tif
	D095424_1_0063.tif
	D095424_1_0065.tif
	D095424_1_0067.tif
	D095424_1_0069.tif
	D095424_1_0071.tif
	D095424_1_0073.tif
	D095424_1_0075.tif
	D095424_1_0077.tif
	D095424_1_0079.tif
	D095424_1_0081.tif
	D095424_1_0083.tif
	D095424_1_0085.tif
	D095424_1_0087.tif
	D095424_1_0089.tif
	D095424_1_0091.tif
	D095424_1_0093.tif
	D095424_1_0095.tif
	D095424_1_0097.tif
	D095424_1_0099.tif
	D095424_1_0101.tif
	D095424_1_0103.tif
	D095424_1_0105.tif
	D095424_1_0107.tif
	D095424_1_0109.tif
	D095424_1_0111.tif
	D095424_1_0113.tif
	D095424_1_0115.tif
	D095424_1_0117.tif
	D095424_1_0119.tif
	D095424_1_0121.tif
	D095424_1_0123.tif
	D095424_1_0125.tif
	D095424_1_0127.tif
	D095424_1_0129.tif
	D095424_1_0131.tif
	D095424_1_0133.tif
	D095424_1_0135.tif
	D095424_1_0137.tif
	D095424_1_0139.tif
	D095424_1_0141.tif
	D095424_1_0143.tif
	D095424_1_0145.tif
	D095424_1_0147.tif
	D095424_1_0149.tif
	D095424_1_0151.tif
	D095424_1_0153.tif
	D095424_1_0155.tif
	D095424_1_0157.tif
	D095424_1_0159.tif
	D095424_1_0161.tif
	D095424_1_0163.tif
	D095424_1_0165.tif
	D095424_1_0167.tif
	D095424_1_0169.tif
	D095424_1_0171.tif
	D095424_1_0173.tif
	D095424_1_0175.tif
	D095424_1_0177.tif
	D095424_1_0179.tif
	D095424_1_0181.tif
	D095424_1_0183.tif
	D095424_1_0185.tif
	D095424_1_0187.tif
	D095424_1_0189.tif
	D095424_1_0191.tif
	D095424_1_0193.tif
	D095424_1_0195.tif
	D095424_1_0197.tif
	D095424_1_0199.tif
	D095424_1_0201.tif
	D095424_1_0203.tif
	D095424_1_0205.tif
	D095424_1_0207.tif
	D095424_1_0209.tif
	D095424_1_0211.tif
	D095424_1_0213.tif
	D095424_1_0215.tif
	D095424_1_0217.tif
	D095424_1_0219.tif
	D095424_1_0221.tif
	D095424_1_0223.tif
	D095424_1_0225.tif
	D095424_1_0227.tif
	D095424_1_0229.tif
	D095424_1_0231.tif
	D095424_1_0233.tif
	D095424_1_0235.tif
	D095424_1_0237.tif
	D095424_1_0239.tif
	D095424_1_0241.tif
	D095424_1_0243.tif
	D095424_1_0245.tif
	D095424_1_0247.tif
	D095424_1_0249.tif
	D095424_1_0251.tif
	D095424_1_0253.tif
	D095424_1_0255.tif
	D095424_1_0257.tif
	D095424_1_0259.tif
	D095424_1_0261.tif
	D095424_1_0263.tif
	D095424_1_0265.tif
	D095424_1_0267.tif
	D095424_1_0269.tif
	D095424_1_0271.tif
	D095424_1_0273.tif
	D095424_1_0275.tif
	D095424_1_0277.tif
	D095424_1_0279.tif
	D095424_1_0281.tif
	D095424_1_0283.tif
	D095424_1_0285.tif
	D095424_1_0287.tif
	D095424_1_0289.tif
	D095424_1_0291.tif
	D095424_1_0293.tif
	D095424_1_0295.tif
	D095424_1_0297.tif
	D095424_1_0299.tif
	D095424_1_0301.tif
	D095424_1_0303.tif
	D095424_1_0305.tif
	D095424_1_0307.tif
	D095424_1_0309.tif
	D095424_1_0311.tif
	D095424_1_0313.tif
	D095424_1_0315.tif
	D095424_1_0317.tif
	D095424_1_0319.tif
	D095424_1_0321.tif
	D095424_1_0323.tif
	D095424_1_0325.tif
	D095424_1_0327.tif
	D095424_1_0329.tif
	D095424_1_0331.tif
	D095424_1_0333.tif
	D095424_1_0335.tif
	D095424_1_0337.tif
	D095424_1_0339.tif
	D095424_1_0341.tif
	D095424_1_0343.tif
	D095424_1_0345.tif
	D095424_1_0347.tif
	D095424_2_0001.tif
	D095424_2_0003.tif
	D095424_2_0005.tif
	D095424_2_0007.tif
	D095424_2_0009.tif
	D095424_2_0011.tif
	D095424_2_0013.tif
	D095424_2_0015.tif
	D095424_2_0017.tif
	D095424_2_0019.tif
	D095424_2_0021.tif
	D095424_2_0023.tif
	D095424_2_0025.tif
	D095424_2_0027.tif
	D095424_2_0029.tif
	D095424_2_0031.tif
	D095424_2_0033.tif
	D095424_2_0035.tif
	D095424_2_0037.tif
	D095424_2_0039.tif
	D095424_2_0041.tif
	D095424_2_0043.tif
	D095424_2_0045.tif
	D095424_2_0047.tif
	D095424_2_0049.tif
	D095424_2_0051.tif
	D095424_2_0053.tif
	D095424_2_0055.tif
	D095424_2_0057.tif
	D095424_2_0059.tif
	D095424_2_0061.tif
	D095424_2_0063.tif
	D095424_2_0065.tif
	D095424_2_0067.tif
	D095424_2_0069.tif
	D095424_2_0071.tif
	D095424_2_0073.tif
	D095424_2_0075.tif
	D095424_2_0077.tif
	D095424_2_0079.tif
	D095424_2_0081.tif
	D095424_2_0083.tif
	D095424_2_0085.tif
	D095424_2_0087.tif
	D095424_2_0089.tif
	D095424_2_0091.tif
	D095424_2_0093.tif
	D095424_2_0095.tif
	D095424_2_0097.tif
	D095424_2_0099.tif
	D095424_2_0101.tif
	D095424_2_0103.tif
	D095424_2_0105.tif
	D095424_2_0107.tif
	D095424_2_0109.tif
	D095424_2_0111.tif
	D095424_2_0113.tif
	D095424_2_0115.tif
	D095424_2_0117.tif
	D095424_2_0119.tif
	D095424_2_0121.tif
	D095424_2_0123.tif
	D095424_2_0125.tif
	D095424_2_0127.tif
	D095424_2_0129.tif
	D095424_2_0131.tif
	D095424_2_0133.tif
	D095424_2_0135.tif
	D095424_2_0137.tif
	D095424_2_0139.tif
	D095424_2_0141.tif
	D095424_2_0143.tif
	D095424_2_0145.tif
	D095424_2_0147.tif
	D095424_2_0149.tif
	D095424_2_0151.tif
	D095424_2_0153.tif
	D095424_2_0155.tif
	D095424_2_0157.tif
	D095424_2_0159.tif
	D095424_2_0161.tif
	D095424_2_0163.tif
	D095424_2_0165.tif
	D095424_2_0167.tif
	D095424_2_0169.tif
	D095424_2_0171.tif
	D095424_2_0173.tif
	D095424_2_0175.tif
	D095424_2_0177.tif
	D095424_2_0179.tif
	D095424_2_0181.tif
	D095424_2_0183.tif
	D095424_2_0185.tif
	D095424_2_0187.tif
	D095424_2_0189.tif
	D095424_2_0191.tif
	D095424_2_0193.tif
	D095424_2_0195.tif
	D095424_2_0197.tif
	D095424_2_0199.tif
	D095424_2_0201.tif
	D095424_2_0203.tif
	D095424_2_0205.tif
	D095424_2_0207.tif
	D095424_2_0209.tif
	D095424_2_0211.tif
	D095424_2_0213.tif
	D095424_2_0215.tif
	D095424_2_0217.tif
	D095424_2_0219.tif
	D095424_2_0221.tif
	D095424_2_0223.tif
	D095424_2_0225.tif
	D095424_2_0227.tif
	D095424_2_0229.tif
	D095424_2_0231.tif
	D095424_2_0233.tif
	D095424_2_0235.tif
	D095424_2_0237.tif
	D095424_2_0239.tif
	D095424_2_0241.tif
	D095424_2_0243.tif
	D095424_2_0245.tif
	D095424_2_0247.tif
	D095424_2_0249.tif
	D095424_2_0251.tif
	D095424_2_0253.tif
	D095424_2_0255.tif
	D095424_2_0257.tif
	D095424_2_0259.tif
	D095424_2_0261.tif
	D095424_2_0263.tif
	D095424_2_0265.tif
	D095424_2_0267.tif
	D095424_2_0269.tif
	D095424_2_0271.tif
	D095424_2_0273.tif
	D095424_2_0275.tif
	D095424_2_0277.tif
	D095424_2_0279.tif
	D095424_2_0281.tif
	D095424_2_0283.tif
	D095424_2_0285.tif
	D095424_2_0287.tif
	D095424_2_0289.tif
	D095424_2_0291.tif
	D095424_2_0293.tif
	D095424_2_0295.tif
	D095424_2_0297.tif
	D095424_2_0299.tif
	D095424_2_0301.tif
	D095424_2_0303.tif
	D095424_2_0305.tif
	D095424_2_0307.tif
	D095424_2_0309.tif
	D095424_2_0311.tif
	D095424_2_0313.tif
	D095424_2_0315.tif
	D095424_2_0317.tif
	D095424_2_0319.tif
	D095424_2_0321.tif
	D095424_2_0323.tif
	D095424_2_0325.tif
	D095424_2_0327.tif
	D095424_2_0329.tif
	D095424_2_0331.tif
	D095424_2_0333.tif
	D095424_2_0335.tif
	D095424_2_0337.tif
	D095424_2_0339.tif
	D095424_2_0341.tif
	D095424_2_0343.tif
	D095424_2_0345.tif
	D095424_2_0347.tif
	D095424_2_0349.tif
	D095424_2_0351.tif
	D095424_2_0353.tif
	D095424_2_0355.tif
	D095424_2_0357.tif
	D095424_2_0359.tif
	D095424_2_0361.tif
	D095424_2_0363.tif
	D095424_2_0365.tif
	D095424_2_0367.tif
	D095424_2_0369.tif
	D095424_2_0371.tif
	D095424_2_0373.tif
	D095424_2_0375.tif
	D095424_2_0377.tif
	D095424_2_0379.tif
	D095424_2_0381.tif
	D095424_2_0383.tif
	D095424_2_0385.tif
	D095424_2_0387.tif
	D095424_2_0389.tif
	D095424_2_0391.tif
	D095424_2_0393.tif
	D095424_2_0395.tif
	D095424_2_0397.tif
	D095424_2_0399.tif
	D095424_2_0401.tif
	D095424_2_0403.tif
	D095424_2_0405.tif
	D095424_2_0407.tif
	D095424_2_0409.tif
	D095424_2_0411.tif
	D095424_2_0413.tif
	D095424_2_0415.tif
	D095424_2_0417.tif
	D095424_2_0419.tif
	D095424_2_0421.tif
	D095424_2_0423.tif
	D095424_2_0425.tif
	D095424_2_0427.tif
	D095424_2_0429.tif
	D095424_2_0431.tif
	D095424_2_0433.tif
	D095424_2_0435.tif
	D095424_2_0437.tif
	D095424_2_0439.tif
	D095424_2_0441.tif
	D095424_2_0443.tif
	D095424_2_0445.tif
	D095424_2_0447.tif
	D095424_2_0449.tif
	D095424_2_0451.tif
	D095424_2_0453.tif
	D095424_2_0455.tif
	D095424_2_0457.tif
	D095424_2_0459.tif
	D095424_2_0461.tif
	D095424_2_0463.tif
	D095424_2_0465.tif
	D095424_2_0467.tif
	D095424_2_0469.tif
	D095424_2_0471.tif
	D095424_2_0473.tif
	D095424_2_0475.tif
	D095424_2_0477.tif
	D095424_2_0479.tif
	D095424_2_0481.tif
	D095424_2_0483.tif
	D095424_2_0485.tif
	D095424_2_0487.tif
	D095424_2_0489.tif
	D095424_2_0491.tif
	D095424_2_0493.tif
	D095424_2_0495.tif
	D095424_2_0497.tif
	D095424_2_0499.tif
	D095424_2_0501.tif
	D095424_2_0503.tif
	D095424_2_0505.tif
	D095424_2_0507.tif
	D095424_2_0509.tif
	D095424_2_0511.tif
	D095424_2_0513.tif
	D095424_2_0515.tif
	D095424_2_0517.tif
	D095424_2_0519.tif
	D095424_2_0521.tif
	D095424_2_0523.tif
	D095424_2_0525.tif
	D095424_2_0527.tif
	D095424_2_0529.tif
	D095424_2_0531.tif
	D095424_2_0533.tif
	D095424_2_0535.tif
	D095424_2_0537.tif
	D095424_2_0539.tif
	D095424_2_0541.tif
	D095424_2_0543.tif
	D095424_2_0545.tif
	D095424_2_0547.tif
	D095424_2_0549.tif
	D095424_2_0551.tif
	D095424_2_0553.tif
	D095424_2_0555.tif
	D095424_2_0557.tif
	D095424_2_0559.tif
	D095424_2_0561.tif
	D095424_2_0563.tif
	D095424_2_0565.tif
	D095424_2_0567.tif
	D095424_2_0569.tif
	D095424_2_0571.tif
	D095424_2_0573.tif
	D095424_2_0575.tif
	D095424_2_0577.tif
	D095424_2_0579.tif
	D095424_2_0581.tif
	D095424_2_0583.tif
	D095424_2_0585.tif
	D095424_2_0587.tif
	D095424_2_0589.tif
	D095424_2_0591.tif
	D095424_2_0593.tif
	D095424_2_0595.tif
	D095424_2_0597.tif
	D095424_2_0599.tif
	D095424_2_0601.tif
	D095424_2_0603.tif
	D095424_2_0605.tif
	D095424_2_0607.tif
	D095424_2_0609.tif
	D095424_2_0611.tif
	D095424_2_0613.tif
	D095424_2_0615.tif
	D095424_2_0617.tif
	D095424_2_0619.tif
	D095424_2_0621.tif
	D095424_3_0001.tif
	D095424_3_0003.tif
	D095424_3_0005.tif
	D095424_3_0007.tif
	D095424_3_0009.tif
	D095424_3_0011.tif
	D095424_3_0013.tif
	D095424_3_0015.tif
	D095424_3_0017.tif
	D095424_3_0019.tif
	D095424_3_0021.tif
	D095424_3_0023.tif
	D095424_3_0025.tif
	D095424_3_0027.tif
	D095424_3_0029.tif
	D095424_3_0031.tif
	D095424_3_0033.tif
	D095424_3_0035.tif
	D095424_3_0037.tif
	D095424_3_0039.tif
	D095424_3_0041.tif
	D095424_3_0043.tif
	D095424_3_0045.tif
	D095424_3_0047.tif
	D095424_3_0049.tif
	D095424_3_0051.tif
	D095424_3_0053.tif
	D095424_3_0055.tif
	D095424_3_0057.tif
	D095424_3_0059.tif
	D095424_3_0061.tif
	D095424_3_0063.tif
	D095424_3_0065.tif
	D095424_3_0067.tif
	D095424_3_0069.tif
	D095424_3_0071.tif
	D095424_3_0073.tif
	D095424_3_0075.tif
	D095424_3_0077.tif
	D095424_3_0079.tif
	D095424_3_0081.tif
	D095424_3_0083.tif
	D095424_3_0085.tif
	D095424_3_0087.tif
	D095424_3_0089.tif
	D095424_3_0091.tif
	D095424_3_0093.tif
	D095424_3_0095.tif
	D095424_3_0097.tif
	D095424_3_0099.tif
	D095424_3_0101.tif
	D095424_3_0103.tif
	D095424_3_0105.tif
	D095424_3_0107.tif
	D095424_3_0109.tif
	D095424_3_0111.tif
	D095424_3_0113.tif
	D095424_3_0115.tif
	D095424_3_0117.tif
	D095424_3_0119.tif
	D095424_3_0121.tif
	D095424_3_0123.tif
	D095424_3_0125.tif
	D095424_3_0127.tif
	D095424_3_0129.tif
	D095424_3_0131.tif
	D095424_3_0133.tif
	D095424_3_0135.tif
	D095424_3_0137.tif
	D095424_3_0139.tif
	D095424_3_0141.tif
	D095424_3_0143.tif
	D095424_3_0145.tif
	D095424_3_0147.tif
	D095424_3_0149.tif
	D095424_3_0151.tif
	D095424_3_0153.tif
	D095424_3_0155.tif
	D095424_3_0157.tif
	D095424_3_0159.tif
	D095424_3_0161.tif
	D095424_3_0163.tif
	D095424_3_0165.tif
	D095424_3_0167.tif
	D095424_3_0169.tif
	D095424_3_0171.tif
	D095424_3_0173.tif
	D095424_3_0175.tif
	D095424_3_0177.tif
	D095424_3_0179.tif
	D095424_3_0181.tif
	D095424_3_0183.tif
	D095424_3_0185.tif
	D095424_3_0187.tif
	D095424_3_0189.tif
	D095424_3_0191.tif
	D095424_3_0193.tif
	D095424_3_0195.tif
	D095424_3_0197.tif
	D095424_3_0199.tif
	D095424_3_0201.tif
	D095424_3_0203.tif
	D095424_3_0205.tif
	D095424_3_0207.tif
	D095424_3_0209.tif
	D095424_3_0211.tif
	D095424_3_0213.tif
	D095424_3_0215.tif
	D095424_3_0217.tif
	D095424_3_0219.tif
	D095424_3_0221.tif
	D095424_3_0223.tif
	D095424_3_0225.tif
	D095424_3_0227.tif
	D095424_3_0229.tif
	D095424_3_0231.tif
	D095424_3_0233.tif
	D095424_3_0235.tif
	D095424_3_0237.tif
	D095424_3_0239.tif
	D095424_3_0241.tif
	D095424_3_0243.tif
	D095424_3_0245.tif
	D095424_3_0247.tif
	D095424_3_0249.tif
	D095424_3_0251.tif
	D095424_3_0253.tif
	D095424_3_0255.tif
	D095424_3_0257.tif
	D095424_3_0259.tif
	D095424_3_0261.tif
	D095424_3_0263.tif
	D095424_3_0265.tif
	D095424_3_0267.tif
	D095424_3_0269.tif
